... your agenda. We will stick to that.
(coughing)
We went
into
the software, it's actually clicking.
Uh, it is in the papers.
Yeah, it is in the papers. It's, it's there, yeah.
Did you-
It changed?
No,
no, it's all right. I'm, I'm just... that, okay.
Thank
you.
Good morning.
See yourself on the screen. (laughs)
So when you're ready we'll get started, so we'll just give 30 seconds.
Yep.
Just make sure.
Can I grab you a coffee now and then?
Would
be wonderful. Okay, sure.
That would be good.
All right. Thank you, so much. Um, so, um,
we will start with opening remarks.
Uh, opening remarks, if you could keep them to around five minutes, that would be
really good. And i- any of your team members, I know that many of you will be
coming forward to the front table to answer questions.
Um, so that is a best practice. So if you have a
question that you feel like we want to answer, please come to the table and speak
into the microphone. And that is important for our staff. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, Tēnā koutou and, and thank you for inviting us this
morning. I'm the acting Secretary and Chief Executive, Suzanne
Sturge. And today, I'm joined by the rest of the MBIE senior leadership
team, and the general managers from the areas that you have indicated you'd like us
to focus on. With me at the table currently is the Deputy Secretary for Corporate
and Digital Shared Services, Richard Griffiths-
Morning.
And on my left, the Chief Financial Officer, Paul Helm.
The other members will introduce themselves as they come up to the table.
Firstly, this morning, I would like to acknowledge our former chief executive,
Carolyn Tremain. Carolyn left MBIE in late September after
eight years as our chief executive.
Carolyn made an enormous contribution to MBIE and the wider public service.
And her leadership has been instrumental in guiding MBIE through
complex challenges and delivering outcomes in support of strengthening New
Zealand's economy and our communities.
Her commitment to public service values and her ability to foster collaboration
across government made her an outstanding leader.
I recognize that at this review this morning, we have big shoes to
fill, um, but look forward with the outstanding help of the team to
answering your questions this morning.
Now, MBIE's focus remains on supporting the delivery of government priorities and
delivering outstanding services to the public.
As an organization, we are right-sized with high-performing people
delivering value-for-money services.
Our main responsibilities span 19 interconnected ministerial
portfolios with support for several more across three main funding
areas. We also have responsibility for 17 regulatory systems
with considerable variation in scope, function, and
risk. These systems underpin economic activity and
growth and provide safety and certainty to people, businesses, and
the country as a whole. In early 2025, the government
launched Going for Growth, and we have been working at pace in
support of this priority across its five pillars, developing
talent, competitive business settings, promoting global trade and
investment, innovation, technology and science, and infrastructure for
growth. This includes delivering a broad suite of
actions from immigration and workforce initiatives to infrastructure
acceleration, investment attraction, and even science
reforms. As an organization, MBIE's efficiency initiatives
focused on structural simplification, reducing organizational
layers, and consolidating functions to streamline our decision-making.
Strong fiscal discipline drove cost savings in such areas as
contractors and consultants, property rationalization, as well
as overall operational efficiencies.
Savings include a departmental baseline reduction of $56 million
and non-departmental savings of $152 million
achieved through ending and scaling back programs that were no longer aligned with
the government's priorities. A major emphasis of our work in MBIE
is ensuring that we are well-placed for the future with our investment
in digital transformation. This includes automation and
AI tools to improve our productivity and reduce administrative
overheads. These changes were underpinned by our refreshed
strategic framework, ensuring alignment with government priorities while building
capability and resilience in our workforce.
Since we last met the committee, we have also delivered
158 Cabinet papers, contributed to the introduction of 12 government
bills to Parliament, and delivered over 4,000
briefings. I also want to acknowledge some of the key items
from the government priorities that our people have successfully achieved this
year. These include actions as part of Going for Growth.
In support of developing talent, our actions include adjusting the immigration
settings to attract skilled workers and regional investment to grow regional
economies by improving resilience and increasing
productivity.In order to improve our competitive business settings, we have
progressed reforms to the Holidays Act and Employment Relations Act, progressed
legislation to streamline financial services regulation, and conducted
reviews of the electricity, banking, and the grocery sectors.
The focus on promotion of global trade investment saw us supporting the
establishment of investment... Invest New Zealand as a one-stop shop for
foreign direct investment, and developing the tourism growth roadmap to double
tourism export value by 2034. The innovation,
technology, and science pillar, all about connecting science and technology systems
to business needs and enabling innovation across our economy.
And we have supported reform of the science system to create
four new public research organizations and established the
Prime Minister's Science Innovation and Technology Advisory Council.
In support of infrastructure for growth, our actions included facilitating a
resilient energy system, approving investments through the Regional and
Infrastructure Fund, and supporting the streamlining of building consents and
the use of overseas building products to lower costs and speed up
delivery. We also supported the delivery of major
regulatory changes, which included initiating consultation on the Holidays Act
reform and the clarification of contractor employment status, as
well as progressing regulatory changes to remove the GE ban and enable safe use of
gene technology. In our energy and resources area, we supported the
Offshore Renewable Energy Bill, the Crown Minerals Amendment Bill, and the Minerals
Strategy under review of the electricity market performance and provided
advice on reforms.
Finally, (laughs) I'd like to highlight some of the achievements of our service
delivery functions. We continue to focus on delivering
high-quality, value-for-money services for our customers.
Our customer satisfaction exceeded 75% across more than
20 services, including tenancy, dispute resolution,
and immigration.
In the last year, we handled over 1.3 million calls
in our service centers with wait times under our five-minute
target, a result I know that many of my private sector
colleagues would be envious of. We've achieved our visa
processing efficiency targets across student visa, work
visa, and employer accreditation applications, and
97% of Migrant Exploitation Protection
visas are assessed and completed within five
days. Even earlier this week, the Tenancy Bond
Services Team introduced a new IT platform, replacing our
old 25-year-old Bond 2000 paper-based
system. Not only does it support pet bonds, but enables
faster service for landlords, for tenants, and for our staff.
I'm really excited about the achievement of this major platform, so hopefully
you'll give us some opportunity later to share more on that.
We've also strengthened our compliance activities across all our regulatory
systems, and the teams are working really hard to ensure that we have a
fair playing field for everyone in New Zealand.
The quality of work that MBIE has done this year and continues to do is testament
to our fantastic people. I know that our people have worked
incredibly hard and at peace once again this year.
So I and the senior leadership team would like to thank them for all that they
have done this year in support of our purpose to grow New Zealand for all.
We are very proud of what they have achieved.
Thank you very much for your indulgence, and we're happy to answer all your
questions.
Thank you so much for those opening remarks.
And, um, there is a structured agenda which has been, I believe, shared with
you. So we will follow that. So, so members, the first one is whole of
organization focus. Uh, Arena Williams.
(inaudible) Hey, thank you all for coming in and acknowledge, um,
many of you who have made your time available to the committee today for our
scrutiny session. It is a long one, but an important one for us.
And acknowledge your comments, uh, about Caroline.
Thank you for, um, bringing more attention to what is a stellar career in, in
public service. Um, many people who will be looking at this
review will understand the workings of the organization, but
looking at it as a whole for ordinary New Zealanders, um, you might be
forgiven for, um, being confused about the per- performance
measures, particularly around the performance targets changing this year.
Why are the targets, um, seemingly becoming easier to
hit, um, and what are you doing to make sure that your
focus on delivery, which you began with, is something that New Zealanders can have
faith in?
So I wouldn't say that we, we go about looking at targets to make them easier to
hit. I think what we look at is, are the targets that we have truly
reflective of the work that we're doing and are they, are they actually measuring
the best outcome? So yes, we will have changed a number of our
measures and that's because we want to ensure that the measures we have
accurately reflect the impact and truly reflect the impact that we're
having. Um, whether or not you think they're easier to hit, I
would also say we're probably getting better at hitting them.
(laughs) So, um, as we improve our performance, it might look that they're getting
easier to hit, but they're actually stretch targets we're working really, really
hard on achieving. Um, it's one of those things that the team, I
think, have a relentless focus on, how can we lift our performance?
And part of that was, was done by doing some of the changes around our
performance strategy for this year, really looking hard at
ourselves about, how do we measure?
Also, how do we get access to data? Uh, maybe, um, Paul or Richard
might want to follow up. But what we have done is, how do we get access to
real-time data or near real-time data to enable us to improve our
performance? And that's where you'll see us use the likes of digital tools
and, and the improvements we've made in our data space so that we can actually
respond much quicker.
Mm-hmm.
So yes, it may look that the targets maybe are getting easier, but actually what is
actually happening is we're getting h- working harder to achieve them, I think, and
doing a better job on that.
Just wanna dig into that, and I'm not trying to catch you in any of these targets.
Mm-hmm.
I wanna appreciate what's going on.
Some, you might appreciate, would be in response to a change in government
priorities. Can you give us ex- an example of those and how they've changed?
Some, um, might be because they were un- they weren't hit
last year and they were un- unachievable.
Can you give us an example of those?
Okay. Give me a minute and... (laughs)
Or, a- and- and as well, I'm interested here in the broader picture
of, um, if we want MBIE to be delivering on,
um, you know, from, from a basis of having targets that we
understand and performance measures that demonstrate not only to New
Zealanders, but to the rest of the public service-
Mm-hmm.
... that MBIE is delivering value and are victory to the, uh, delivery
focus.
Hmm.
Um, how, how do we get a sense of that from a system-wide
view?
I think some of that is changing, um, if you think about changing
behaviors. So, one, I know some of the things we are looking at
in our service delivery space, for example, going forward,
is we'll have, we have targets which say we will continually grow the
number of people who will visit, for example, a
website. Well, the way things are going now with the use of
AI-
Right.
... people are less likely to come directly to your website.
What you actually want to be is the answer to the question that when someone asks
AI what the question is, you're the answer to it, and you're the, you're the actual
authoritative source for that answer.
And so, as, so that's one of the... I, I can give you an example of why you would
say, "Oh, well, that would be an easy thing to change.
You'll, you'll just lower the bar and see you don't need to have so many people
coming." Well, actually, they're not going to come directly.
What we need to u- do is use better tools to ensure that we are
the, we are the authoritative source for those questions, and that people aren't
being given the wrong answer. Which is, so you'll see us adjust where we start to
see things like that change. So it's not that we're trying to say we don't want to
do a great work, we don't want to ensure that we're raising awareness for the
public. It's about us recognizing that technology has changed,
people's behaviors have changed, and therefore we have to measure it a different
way. That I would need to go and start looking through for some others for you, but
that's, that's the kind of thing where you will see us change our approach to how
we measure.
So, so am I getting the right idea that the targets aren't a focus for you?
They are a focus.
Oh, yeah.
Oh my goodness, yes.
And that's why I talked about, right at the start, about our ongoing investment in
our data and technology to make sure that we have the best information at our
fingertips to ensure we are monitoring our progress and making
sure we're doing the right thing.
Can, can I add a comment? Um, so, so we have a program in place with
regards to improving the performance measures and actually, uh, hitting those
targets. Um, so that involves logic mapping through.
It goes through which ones we think we can actually achieve relatively sooner than
later.
Right.
Uh, the logic mapping actually helps transfer from inputs, outputs, to
outcomes, because what we found was in hi- historically, a lot
of the measure had been output-focused rather than outcome-focused and impact.
So, in working through our program, um, and we've made improvements
on, I think that was acknowledged by Audit New Zealand as well, um, we are
systematically just working through the ones we believe that need work, uh,
changing the thinking from logic mapping from, "If this is having an impact, what
does that look like? What would be the appropriate measures in place?" And then
transferring into those. Uh, there's still a number of years of work, I think,
still, to actually get through all of our performance measures.
And as the government changes outcomes or changes funding, uh, sometimes
we see them drop away, sometimes funding drops away.
But yeah, that's an absolute, uh, focus for us, for, uh, particularly with the
finance and performance team.
Right. A new family from, uh, Honorable Jenny Anderson.
Thank you very much, uh, Madam Chair.
Um, I, I was just interested to ask a couple questions around, um-
Go ahead.
... product, labor productivity, if that's okay?
Mm-hmm.
Um, I note that there was sort of no, um, sort of positive shifts
across the four outcomes, as we've noted.
Um,
and it, and that there was sort of negative trends in real
household median weekly income, um, labor
productivity growth, and also, uh, employment in new
businesses.
So, so we have a structured agenda here.
Oh, right. So I thought it was like overview.
Yeah.
Is
this- So we are on Part One. So if, if you can bring it to the whole of organization,
because we have labor productivity in Part Two.
Well, as an all of organization, what did you do to improve real
household median weekly income, um, in terms
of, uh, what, what kinds of steps went towards-
Oh,
We'll go straight to policy.
Okay.
So there's only, um, so much that, uh, departments can do in the short term.
The real, um, productivity is really a long-term, uh,
challenge. Um, and it's been an ongoing challenge for New Zealand
for, for decades actually. Our productivity has remained low, and
the gap between us and, and, you know, other-
Mm-hmm.
... um, advanced economies has been growing.
So it's a, it's, uh, very much a long-term challenge.
And so the solution to that is to look at whatever the medium-term
policy settings that could change to, uh, to it,
to, to change that trajectory. And so the, the key thing that we do as
a, as MBIE, is our, um, policy work to
address those, uh-
(clears throat) ... medium-term settings that are likely to put that on a different trajectory.
And that goes to the, to the Going For Growth agenda that-
Mm-hmm.
... um, Suzanne's talked about and, uh, MBIE's role in some of those programs.
Just from your, from, from, from your own understanding, what, what do you think
really, if you could summarize, are the key factors that, that New
Zealand does need to address, not, not just in the medium term, but overall what's
holding us back the most in terms of that productivity?
I think there's a whole-
Can I just interrupt there? So just want to be very, very clear that you are asking
question about the productivity of MBIE because this is whole of
organization. So labor productivity is in Part Two.
So we haven't moved to Part Two yet.
Okay. Well, I, I'm not there yet, and it's kind of on, I'm not a- able
to ask questions then. And I, it does relate to the whole organiz-
We do have a structured agenda,
I mean, one of the core functions of MBIE, I would assume, would be-
So if you focus it on MBIE's productivity, that's why we're
here. Okay. So, uh, as you're, as an all-of organization goal to
increase the labor productivity-
(laughs)
... of New Zealand, what do you foresee as being one of the inhibiting factors of
us reaching, um, a, comparative with other countries-
Do you want us to, but can we talk about MBIE's productivity?
Sure. So for the, um, uh, for the economy, um,
the...
If I go right back to the... Probably-
Sorry, no. I- I- I'm- I'm- I am interested in my productivity.
So, but, um-
That is part two. So, we haven't moved up to part two.
Well,
So, I don't want to repeat
this again. And what- what time do you get to part two,
do you think? So, I think y- y- you need to have access to papers if you are on the
committee.
And I... Any other members have questions here? A new primary from Dr.
Vanessa Bennett.
I make the question, please.
Hold on, hold on.
A new primary from Dr. Vanessa Bennett.
Thank you, madam chair. Um, thank you very much for your overview.
Um, it's- it's quite, um, a huge
organization, obviously, um, and, uh, a- and that
comes with its own, um, benefits and some challenges.
Um, I think if we are looking at the, um, the overall
organization, one of the things that always, a question that always comes to me
is how... What are the mechanisms that you keep, um, the
whole team together with? How, uh...
How do you, um... How do you manage to keep all of the
different departments, um, in one place without
having little empires being built all over the
show?
Okay. Um, I- I- I appreciate that from the outside,
sometimes MB can look a little bit, you know, h- a- quite
big.
Mm-hmm.
Um, first of all, start with the common purpose.
And so, if there's one thing that I can say about, um, our MB
people, and they are all behind a common purpose, and if you put that at
the forefront, it's always easier to rally everyone together with a common thing
that you're aiming at. At the end, I think around me, we are
surrounded by a really, really strong leadership team who, uh, work
together-
Mm-hmm.
... um, settle problems and challenges together.
And that enables us with a common plan, with a common strategy to actually work
together around, how do we bring the pieces to focus on
things? The- the benefit of MB is, is that, right?
It can look across the system, multiple systems-
Mm-hmm.
... and see where are the gaps, where there overlaps, and
how can we ensure that we manage
those- those gaps or overlaps as best as we can and as
efficiently as we can. And so, I think what we do
is... I'll give you an example. So, for our compliance teams, and
it may look that we have got rather, um, different compliance teams in
terms of we have immigration compliance teams, we have labor inspectorate, we
have tenancy compliance teams, we have compliance teams around the companies.
But if you think about it, they are all looking at ensuring there's a fair playing
field for people in New Zealand. Um, when they work together on a
common... And you'll see us now where we have common, um,
operations, we bring to bear the- the actual
understanding of our... In the round.
Yeah.
How can we help businesses? Both how can we help businesses and employees and
employers, but also, how can we hold bad actors to
account? I give you an example of something we did, uh, about a year
ago where instead of each of those business units going and talking to
businesses before the ski season, they went together.
They went to see, um, businesses in Queenstown and said, "From an
employment point of view, this is what you need to think about when you're bringing
in migrant workers for the ski season.
From the migration, immigration point of view, these are the visa considerations
you need to think about. From the tenancy or housing point of view, here's the
things you need to think about." So, instead of expecting businesses to go to three
different sessions, MB came as one and
said, "Here's how we can help you across the board." And that was
exceptionally well-received. So, I think-
Yeah. ... how we bring it together is by that unrelenting focus on why we're
here, what's the purpose for the organization, and a
culture that says we work together as one MB. That's...
And to be honest, we have fantastic people who are relentlessly focused on that
every day. And so, that actually makes it easier for us.
Can I, can I add a couple-
Mm-hmm.
... of extra comments? So, the- the way the organization is structured with respect
to its governance and oversight. Uh, so we have a number of committees.
So, we have a finance investment committee that's chaired by deputy secretaries,
but we also, uh, use our general managers and their cross-functional team.
Mm-hmm.
So, rather than just have a vertical silo, so the- the, uh, chair of our
finance investment committee isn't me and isn't Paul.
(laughs)
It's one of our other DCEs.
Mm-hmm.
Um, a- and that's a little bit around ensuring that we are working horizontally, to
your point-
Yeah. ... as opposed to, uh, working in the silos.
Um, so we have finance investment. We have a- a risk and audit, uh, committee.
We've got a- a people committee. We've got, um, a team that looks
after all of our projects. But again, they're all cross-functional teams.
Um, we've got a really comprehensive people strategy as well, so looks at, uh,
leadership capability-
Mm-hmm.
... and our people lead capability.
They are done in forums with our, again, cross-functional, so that we've got that
network kind of approach. We actually run, uh, um,
sessions called Network, which is for our people leaders to
actually, one, get to know each other, but share some of the common issues they
may be facing. And of course, we've also got our engagement survey, uh, which,
uh, is- is, uh, well, uh, responded to,
and highlights some of the actions. We take those as well with regards to...
And they can be things focusing on leadership, communications.
There's weekly, uh, blogs that go out and vlogs that go out from the chief
executive. And we run regular, uh, huis with our people, but also with,
um, our, uh, next layer down leadership teams too at three- threes and fours.
Actually, if I can just chip in. Uh, you mentioned our engagement survey.
Um, we take really seriously what our people feed back to us.
Mm-hmm.
And one of the areas, as you mentioned, uh, two of the questions they gave us was,
"The people in my team collaborate to get the work done, and the people in my
team are encouraged to come up with new and better ways of doing things." Where we
are... I mean, we're sitting up in the 87%, which
is above the rest of the public service.
And I- I'll tell you, from my days in the private sector, I'd have loved those
(laughs) results too.
(laughs)
So, we have a team that na- it's a culture that is of natural
collaboration.
Yeah.
Mm-hmm.
And, um, just to supplement on that, um, what's, uh,
what's the state of your IT systems in terms of helping to
support the culture and the work in, um, in the
organization?
So, we invest quite a bit. I'm gonna stop Richard chomping at the bit-
(laughs)
... to tell you all about AI. Um, we invest significantly in our
IT systems. Uh-I'll save the, the, the
tenancy one for later. But, uh, not only for systems to enable our
customers, but also to enable our people.
And I've given Richard enough pause now to then go on to talk about-
(laughs)
... where it's (inaudible) our investments in IT.
Sure. So-
Thank you. Um, i- it's a great question.
So, MBIE is a combination of a number of, uh, agencies.
And yes, it's 12 years old, but, um, so there's a collection of
different databases, collection of different systems.
Some are very old, some are new. And, uh, so our approach has always been
to modernize, manage what we call the tech debt side of things, but also
look to upgrade systems, make sure they're safe and secure.
We have a three to five year technology roadmap, uh, that is written in what
we call value streams. So, if you think about an integrated immigration
system, that's a complete, uh, workstream in itself.
The entire tenancy bond is a complete workstream in itself.
Mm-hmm. Our entire service centers are a complete workstream in
themselves. Those workstreams contain a number of initiatives.
Um, sometimes they can be just simply security, making sure that
they, everything's, uh, from a cyber perspective is okay.
But inherently, they are focused at improving the service
delivery. Two focuses, one on customer or
citizen, the other is on making it easier for our people to do their
jobs. We see AI, uh, as being a huge tool to
actually supplement and help that.
Mm-hmm.
Um, we've already seen a number of, uh, things introduced into our
service center that has reduced administrative time on, if
you like, drafting up post calls-
Yeah.
... where it can auto- be automatically transcribed to allow people-
... to actually get on them. So there's those kind of things-
Mm-hmm.
... that w- we reduce what we call the cognitive load.
Um, and we've got AI embedded in, uh, lots of our, uh, platforms.
Mm-hmm.
And the question is just actually turning those on, but turning those on in a safe,
responsible, and ethical way.
Mm-hmm.
Um, I think the world's still learning about AI.
And, uh, we're just making sure that we open up the tools to allow our people to be
more, uh, effective, um, reduce the, what we call cognitive load, and then
also just that it's safe.
Great.
Yeah.
Okay. Thank you.
A final question for, uh, for this part, and then we will move on to part two.
Irena Williams.
Oh. Yeah.
Only 25 minutes for this. Do you have a question for, for part one?
I do.
Mm-hmm.
Um, I wonder if you can help us. We set aside time for this
section as a committee because we, we want to
understand the targets and how they've changed.
Um, and, uh, I see that
that's-
(coughs)
... perhaps not what you anticipated.
But can you help us to understand what has changed?
Because last year when the committee considered this, there were some targets that
were unmet that have been changed.
So it looks to us like there might be some,
um, you know, that perhaps one might
look at it and think there was a moving of the goalpost so that, so that those
could be met. And then there are some that have changed because of the government's
priorities changing, and that's perfectly fine.
Um, but we don't know what those are because we didn't change them.
Help us to, um, get a picture of what those targets are hitting and,
and how you're performing well, and what are the things that you're still working
towards, as you said, over a few years.
I, I... At this point, I don't think we'll be able to go through every single
target and tell you what-
No, I agree.
... we've got. So I do think it would probably better we come back with a written
response where we highlight all the ones that have changed and the reasons why.
All right.
But there's at the back on, um, 240...
In fact, if... I'll go... I'll, I'll...
Head to 240,
the back of our book, you'll see that it runs for a number
of pages where we divide them into those who have been discontinued for no
funding, those who have changed, um, the location of
where they're reported, those who have changed due to changes in government
priorities, and those which are quite a few, it runs to...
Changes in government priorities runs to three pages.
Discontinued, no funding runs to another three pages.
Yeah.
Um, so there's quite a few. The pages I'm, I'm assuming you want
to are the ones which are around we've replaced or improved the
measure.
Yeah.
Um, those are around ones which I think as we go through each of the
areas, we could come back in terms of what...
As we talk through each of the policy areas, it might be worth then talking then
about why we made those changes as we go through each of the individual policy
areas. Um, most of those you'll see there's a
number which have been changed because we have to align with the
FRS change-
Financial reporting.
Yeah. ... of reporting financial reporting statement.
So, they are things we just have to do from a technical point of
view. Um, and some of them are, as we've talked about,
changes because actually things have moved on and we are trying to reflect
more accurately what's happening, um, out in the market.
Um, some are new measures because we've got a new appropriation.
So there's, there's unfortunately
nine pages of small print-
Fair enough.
... you know, we would go through. So I think it's probably best in terms of the
committee's time we'll come back with a written-
Yeah, so a follow-up question for the-
... response for you. (laughs)
Thank you. Uh, so we do... Uh, yeah, that's noted, uh, for a follow-up
question. And now we move on to part two.
And I will-
So I put my hand up.
... turn to Honorable Jenny Anderson. Yeah.
Thank you. Now am I allowed to ask my question?
Yeah, you are.
Um, what did the ministry do in 2024 and '25 to improve
real household median weekly incomes-
Next one.
... um, in terms of how much money people are
being able to bring in?
Now you get to go.
And, and, and acknowledging too that in the context that, um,
cost of living has increased-
Mm-hmm.
... over a period of time and that's putting strain on, on the
household.
So I think my main, my main answer is, is as before that uh, the, the main thing
that MBIE can do is to be, uh, focusing on those medium-term
policy settings that are going to, uh, um,
hopefully, uh, shift the, the dial in New Zealand's productivity performance longer
term. Um, there are obviously shorter term things as well, things
like, um, the focus on, uh, tourism or, um,
immigration setting changes that can have more immediate effect on, um,
giving, uh, impetus to the economy.
But, you know, primarily there's those medium-term settings changes.
I would be happy to answer other questions as well.
When, um, quite often... And this isn't in any particular government, but what we
see in New Zealand is, um, uh-
When things are cyclical in terms of unemployment, we'll use
immigration as a way of, um... And the construction sector, for example,
is one where we've lost a lot of workers and, um, likely over the next
12 to 18 months, we'll, we'll be wanting to, um, attract people from other
countries, fill some of the, the shortfall we have in, in upcoming
projects. Do you do any analysis on what the impact
is on productivity when you're having to bring in workers from other
countries to fill gaps in our labor market?
Does that have wider implications that you take into a, um, into
account, or, or, or not really?
Um, well, from a, uh, long-term productivity perspective, the key thing from the
immigration system is how targeted it is to higher skills.
Yeah.
Um, and the, uh, changes that the government's made through, particularly through
the AUWV, the Approved Employer Work Visa settings, um, have
been, uh, successful in shifting the skills mix.
So they were, um, a couple of years ago at sort of 60%
lower skilled to 40% high-skilled, and now with, um, the
tightening that's been made, that's now, uh, around 85%
in the higher skilled and 15% low skilled.
So from a, again, medium-term productivity perspective, I think that's the, the
major factor. I think from a, you know, there's also shorter term
macroeconomic impacts that are, do get taken into account
about what's the, um, the impact on the economy from a surge
in, in immigration because it's, uh, because it's linked to
jobs, um, and the... as the economy's
booming, then employers tend to be really hungry for workers that can
end up exacerbating cycles. And so they're, you know, the Treasury and,
and others would be concerned about them, and the Reserve Bank, about the
macroeconomic impacts in the shorter term.
But from a medium-term productivity, it is those skills, um, and, and making sure
that the system attracts, uh, skilled, high-skilled people.
Um, just to go back to that question, I'm always interested in why, um, we often
use Ireland or other countries that are, are, is a similar population size
as to looking at their productivity compared to ours.
I- is there any sort of
area you could draw attention to? And, and I know you...
there'll be medium-term and longer term, you know, goals that we're working
towards, but what, what's one of...
If, if I was talking to an average New Zealander and trying to say what, what is
our productivity problem here in New Zealand because we're so much lower than other
comparative countries, what's one of the things that is holding us back?
Yeah. Um, so I could talk for a long time about this.
(laughs)
Let me try and do a shorter version. Um, so the...
I mean-
We're more interested in the actions rather than the talking (laughs) .
(laughs)
Yeah (laughs) . Yeah. Um, so the, the, the...
If you stand right back, the big things for New Zealand are that we are small and
distant, and a lot of our, um, economic issues stem from those
two factors. So, being small means that,
um, competition is, tends to be lower than it otherwise would be, and competition's
a big driver of innovation. It means that, um, our exporters
have to export from an earlier stage in their lifecycle than they do from
larger economies. It means we don't have the very large firms which tend
to have better, um, management capability and management pathways.
So a lot stems from that smallness, and then the distance means...
You know, Ireland, um, they've got EU market access right on their doorstep and
that's been a massive thing that they have taken advantage of.
Mm-hmm.
Um, but, uh, we don't have that. So that takes you to policy settings
that try and, um, increase that, um, competition, that,
uh, help, um, the exporters and the, um, base to emerge over
time. Another big feature of the New Zealand economy is that our
capital... We're capital shallow, so we... and you... Our, um...
For, over a long period of time, our businesses haven't invested, um, in the way
that other economies have. And investment is important for...
Because it makes us, makes individual workers more productive and it also can bring
in, um, embodied technology. So it brings innovation through
investment as well. And so, um, that's a big, another big feature.
And so that takes you to policy areas like, um, the tax on
capital, um, the savings, um, pools and how those are
deployed. Um, uh, and so things like, you know, Investment Boost in
this budget, we were, uh, very supportive of as MBIE, um, as a way
of trying to lower the cost of businesses to, to invest.
So those are some of the big-
Yeah.
... longer-term jobs.
Is there any specific actions or work programs that the ministry's undertaken that
address specifically labor productivity?
Well, I think you have to break down labor productivity into those different
components. And so, uh, yes, we have, uh, lots
of... In fact, all of our work really
... from an economic point of view is targeted at trying to improve that
longer-term produ- productivity challenge.
So, you know, a very large work program in the competition area, as I, as I, um,
mentioned before. Um, we have been looking a lot at, um, capital
shallowness and what can be done to improve capital, um, deepening over
time.
Thank you.
All right. A supplementary from Dr. David Wilson.
First of all is apologies for my lateness, Chair.
It's all right.
I had a problem with the building. It was tall.
(laughs)
Lift wasn't working.
Oh.
Um, (clears throat) you ta- you spoke a lot about, um,
macroeconomic influences, and you have a constellation of
functions that focus on the micro-level businesses.
Um, can you outline to us what programs do you think have had the greatest
impact or are likely to have the greatest impact in improving labor productivity
from the micro region perspective?
So, so let me-
Yeah, this will take a while.
So let me go, um... If I, if I go broader on the Going for Growth agenda, which
includes some things outside MBIE.
And then I can, um, come back to the MBIE things. But, um, you know, on the...
The overall Going for Growth agenda is, uh, has a very medium-term
focus. But I think some of those, uh, larger areas are around
the planning and, uh, infrastructure, um, work
that the government is doing. I think that goes again to the capital shallowness.
If those incentives to invest, the environment to invest isn't strong,
then, then businesses won't do so.
I think the, um, uh, the... One of the other features, again, outside
MBIE is the education achievement, the, the declining
PISA rates, um, the PIAT, which is the in-work
skills level has also been declining. Those are...
From a human capital perspective, those are worrying.
And so the, the focus on, um, you know, curriculum and, and
achievement, those are, those are significant, um, changes.Um, you
know, ultimately what drives, um, productivity is innovation.
You know, technology and-
Mm-hmm.
... and investment is one way into that, and other is through the science system.
Um, and so, you know, coming into MBIE, I think the- the science reforms are
a- are a large, um, um, important factor.
And I've already mentioned the- the competition, um, work, uh, that's being
done through, you know, the Commerce Act, uh, reforms and in particular, um,
investigations into the groceries, banking sector, um, and so on.
So, those would be some of the main ones I'd point to.
Mm-hmm. Including things like en- encouraging competition through things like the
consumer data rights that enables new businesses to start up and new
opportunities to start. Um, and I would really emphasize as
well, uh, New Zealand is an amazing country in terms of
coming up with new innovations. What we need to get better at is commercializing
those innovations and taking them to the world.
Mm-hmm. Supplementary, yeah.
Yeah, um, thank you for leaning into the innovation system and
the changes. Um, I- I guess what I'm
fishing for, it's how does this touch the businesses
themselves? Because quite often we have distant
innovation assets that are distant from them- each other and they're distance
from commercialization opportunities.
So, how do you think the changes will affect your organization in
particular, touching those individual businesses that have the potential to export
and the potential to innovate?
So ma- maybe one of the areas that's, um, most closely to businesses is the
R&D, uh, packs, uh, incentive.
Yeah.
Um, we, uh, did an evaluation of that, um, earlier in the year,
um, that was shown that it was- um, that was working well.
It was, um, getting bang for buck in the way these things are measured.
Um, the- so that's an- obviously a direct thing that businesses can access and
there are other innovation grants around that, um, that has to date
been administered by Callaghan Innovation-
Yeah.
... as part of the reforms. Um, that function is now inside MBIE,
so that is one thing that, you know, we'll be working directly with businesses to
help them access that sort of, um, support.
Uh, and then more broadly on the science reforms, um,
the- the merging of the CRIs and the focus on
trying to shift to more commercialization is a, uh, and
a- the intent there is to get there much more business, um, facing,
industry-facing. Um, and then, uh, and, um, again, not MBIE's
portfolio but on the university side with the tertiary education
strategy, um, the minister there is similarly trying to get the universities to do
much more, um, thinking about industry connections as well.
So, those are some of the ways that businesses should- should start to have access
and that's-
I would add into that-
... yeah, short supplementary.
Sorry, I was just gonna add into that as well that, um, some of the other things
that we do are actually reaching out to businesses in terms of things like the
regional business partner network that we work with, um, to provide
coaching and AI tools and capability.
Um, we now have, I think, just about 750 different kind of training
videos on there, particularly around AI.
I think the bit that I've been most heartened about is that the
highest downloaded of the five- of the
top five videos in terms of coaching around AI isn't what
is AI and how do-
That's
right. We're- we're- we're beyond that now.
It's now, how can I use AI to make my business more effective and efficient?
How can I use AI to improve MI productivity?
So, we can definitely see that New Zealand businesses are out
there and that we're using the regional business partner network to help us meet
that demand.
Yeah, and with-
Okay.
So that was your final supplementary.
Right.
Uh, so, we have a new primary from Scott Willis.
Thank you. Um, given the amount of funding it took to de-
disestablish Callaghan Innovation, it's something like 24 million,
has the closure been successful in providing stability to the sector
and- and- and those who have been employed by the sector, would you
say?
Uh, point of order-
So-
... Chair. Um-
So this question is for
Callaghan, isn't it? ... we're talking- we're talking about the, um, cost-
So we have Callaghan Innovation coming later on.
And we-
So if you want to ask their end of acquiring what they are supposed to acquire,
that would be totally fine.
But I-
But I was just rela- there was- we were just talking about Callaghan Innovation.
Sorry.
Yeah, yeah. So but we have sh- it has to do with Callaghan, how they are closing
and everything going fine. That will be for Callaghan.
But for their end, if you want to ask, uh, questions about their end, that's fine.
So I- um, I- we do also have a science section in part six-
Yeah.
Yes. ... um, where I'll- where I'll have some of my team as well.
But I can do- I can do a brief answer now if that-
Okay, and you'd like, come back
to it. If you would like, Madam Chair?
Yeah. And we can actually talk about
it. Yep, that- that would be fine. I think we leave it for that part, part six.
Okay.
Uh, so if we just-
... go on to, uh, regional development and then
come back to it. Okay. Well, if I- if I can follow up there.
Yeah,
Um, you'll certainly be aware that we have record numbers
of young people leaving the country at the moment.
We have record levels of unemployment.
We have active de-industrialization
happening. Would, w- when we are running
out, and we know that there's no more gas at the moment, we just
heard particularly from the Boston Consulting Group,
um, if we don't see new
policies that are introduced for productivity and for
supporting our regions, what- what impact do you think
this situation we're in is going to have for
jobs, for industry? Who- who is going to
win and who's gonna lose out from this situation?
Uh, few, um, uh, points, um, there.
Uh, so in the- in the short term, you know, it- there's no doubt the economy's
in- not in great, uh, shape. The, um, particularly concerning is
the- the- the decline in GDP per capita.
That's, you know, that's ultimately, um, uh, the meas- a measure of living
standards. Um, so that is absolutely, um, concerning.
That is a- there's a cyclical element, um, there and then obviously there's the
long-term trends that, um, I've been talking about.
But in terms of migration and net migration, that does become a bit of
a safety valve in- in how the economy operates.
So, uh, yes, we have seen net migration, um, but
relative to population, the overall departure rate of New Zealand
citizens is similar to what we saw in the 2010s....
um, you know, in what ne- net migration has come back from its peaks.
And, uh, at- at least in part, that does have some macroeconomic, um,
benefit because it takes some pressure out of the- the economy and helps it, um,
adjust. So, um, the... And- and unemployment,
again, it's, uh, um, not good that it is at, you know,
at- at highs that we haven't seen since the 2010s.
It is only 5.3%. And when you compare to that to New Zealand historically or
internationally, that's- that could be worse.
Um, and I think that goes to, um, some of the flexibility of our labor market
settings, which is positive. Um, now that- that said, we absolutely would like to
see the economy, um, moving again to be able to, um,
restore, um, growth across the- the economy because as you say,
different parts of the country are experiencing it differently, um, at the
moment. Uh, and I don't know, Robert, whether you want to comment from a regional
perspective.
Mm-hmm. What you say?
Oh, thank you very much, Nick. Um,
well, the- the economy is, as Nick's just said, it- it's, uh, not in particularly
great state. Uh, and there are some real challenges in the, at a regional
level. We see that as well. Um, I- I think it has
been protected from the programs that have been put in place over the last
eight years and the continuation of things like,
um, uh, the programs to keep water out of the wrong- wro-
wro- wrong places and keep it in the right places.
So the Stop Bank program continues to pro- uh, provide
work for lots of people that otherwise would be displaced.
And that's a program of work that I think is going to...
It needs to continue for many years.
Uh, we can't solve it all at once, but for some of those small trucking
contracted firms in the regions, that sort of work is a lifeline
to- to be able to sustain their business and their workforces
on an ongoing basis. And from a community and a national
perspective, of course, um, it provides the resilience and the
safety in regions from protection from floods.
Uh, but also, uh, we're- we're building water storage
facilities for irrigation as well.
Mm-hmm. So, Keeravki.
Just a supplementary here. So, um, there-
there's a remaining chunk of government investment in
decarbonizing industry funding that's still out there
that's, um, helping companies move away
from reliance on unstable energy sources.
What- what do you think, um, what do you think-
Do I need to answer this
one? ... that- that-
Yeah, so-
I'm
Can I just say to members-
Oh.
... that we have a structured agenda, if you could follow that agenda?
So we are on-
So, we're trying, we're try... We're-
Energy is the next-
We're in the section talking about-
Yeah. Um, so Energy is part three.
... phosphorous and the... labor productivity and regional development.
Yeah, productivity. And the g-
so- And the g- so, Government-
Please interject.
Yeah.
Sorry.
So- so, uh, yeah. So, I did... I know there is a bit of
overlap between, uh, employment systems and productivity, so your previous
question was... Well, I didn't get to that, but this one you'll have the
opportunity to ask in part three.
Well, no-
If you want to come back to productivity.
Well, I'd like to, Chair, I'd like to address this because the government
investment in Decarbonizing Industry Fund was for regional development.
It helps regional development, it helps-
Labor productivity.
Yes. So you can rephrase the question. Yeah.
So, the way you started-
But really,
can they- ... the question, it sounded more like-
Come on.
... energy-focused rather than regional development.
Madam Chair, Madam Chair, I'd just like to point out that the purpose of Scrutiny
Week is a free-flowing discussion.
Yes, the structured agenda is a guide that we've all agreed to, but I think
by, um, uh, preventing members asking only reasonable
questions that might spill over into labor productivity, regional
development, uh, I don't think that facilitates the
transparency of a free-flowing discussion, um, of us just wanting
to understand how things are operating.
Okay. Okay. Y- I think you have enough experience to understand how things operate.
And
Well, I think you have
enough experience to- We have a structured agenda.
... ask questions.
We have... That means we have wasted time of so many people, those who have
prepared a- a structured agenda for this committee, and I won't let that happen.
So, we will stick to the structured agenda. Do you have a question?
Or shall we move on?
Yes, I- I pose a
Okay. Can you ask, stick to part two at this
stage?
Thinking about regional economic development, which is in part two of
our structured agenda, the government investment and Decarbonize
Action, Um, of Industry Fund has
been important in regional development and in ensuring
productivity. Do you... Do you think
that the- the remaining part of that fund is
helping us ensure productivity in our regions?
And where do you think we might find a replacement or
some sort of way to support that- that
regional economic
development?
I mean, overall in the energy system, I mean, I think the overall,
um, uh, the importance of productivity is to have a-
well-functioning energy market.
And I think that is actually the- the fundamental- the fundamental, um, focus for
the government in terms of the energy, um, system at the moment, uh,
to, um, to get that in a better- in a better shape than it is now.
So I know there's a regional angle, but I'm just saying from an overall
perspective, I think
that- In terms of the Energy Action Plan?
I'm really not talking about the energy system, I'm talking about the government
assistance for industry. That's the government investment in decarbonizing
industry. That's the government assistance to industry.
Well, under the Regional Infrastructure Fund, there have been several
small, um, solar
farms, solar energy projects at a community level that have been
funded in parts of New Zealand to help with that decarbonization.
Uh, there's been, uh, investments made in Rakiura to- to
address the, um, the energy there that has
historically been created from diesel generators.
Um, and there's, uh, the- the wind turbines are now operative
in the Chathams, uh, which again, takes away
electricity being generated by primarily diesel generators.
So I think that w- without perhaps specifically
addressing the Decarbonisation Fund, there are elements within-...
the program of work from a regional infrastructure fund and other broader
energy initiatives that are, uh, continuing to address that
through the installation of renewable energy programs.
I wonder if you want to mention geothermal as well or-
Yeah.
... because that's been a big focus.
Super critical.
Yeah, uh, uh, thanks, Nick. Um,
and, and as you're aware, the government has made a decision to commit $60
million towards the first exploratory well in the
supercritical-
Mm-hmm.
... geothermal program. That is a, a, a significant
development in terms of our geothermal expertise, which
started
1958 when we were the first nation to really
commercialize the technology that the Italians had developed
pre-war. And over the, uh, decades since
then, New Zealand's built a international reputation for being experts in this
area alongside, uh, the Italians and the, uh,
people from Iceland. But there is a new frontier, and
that's where we are, um, now attempting to
reach. Uh, there was... There's been lots of research done
internationally, but also by GNS in New Zealand off the back of funding from the
Endeavour Fund over the last five to six years to
prove up at a scientific level where these resources
sit and what they probably look like.
Um, this is not a silver bullet that's going to solve our, our
energy, um, uh, challenges
tomorrow, but if successful, it does
re-establish what our base load energy systems are in New Zealand
because the potential power that exists in these deep, super
hot geothermal systems is significantly more than
at a conventional level.
Mm-hmm.
So, I think that, and we have great global support that the...
The geothermal community globally is very small, very tight-
Mm-hmm.
... and everybody is looking to cooperate and collaborate to see
this venture, uh, successful. It, it has some big
challenges.
Mm-hmm.
Right? There's significant pressure-
... significant temperature, and probably significant,
uh, corrosion, uh, and with that will come, um, thermal
expansion in the piping system to be addressed, but there, there, there are
many universities, research development, uh,
organizations, private and public sector organizations in the
world that are, that are working together to try and address those
challenges.
Thank you.
And so it's
just- Okay, so line us up and then... Yep.
So, thank you. And that's fascinating and I'm really looking forward to digging
into that. But, um, coming back to the,
um, um, the GIDI Fund, I... As
that, as that resource
peters out-
Mm-hmm.
... are you arguing that the Regional Development Fund is essentially a
replacement to, to help with
the, with... To, to slow the, the
de-industrialization? Is, is the Regional Development Fund doing
that job?
Um, I, I don't think that's what it's...
That is not what its primary function is, and that is not the criteria, but
the, but the government has established that fund on the
basis that it is supporting the development of infrastructure and,
and renewable energy was an element of that, just as water storage
was part of that, flood protection, and improving general
resilience in our, in our, um, regional, um,
regional economies. So, I don't know that you...
I don't think you can say it's a replacement for it, but it is a
logical part of regional development
because, um, where our... You know, all our geothermal is
primarily in that Ta- Taupo Volcanic Zone.
Mm-hmm.
There are so many, uh, ancillary businesses that we could hook off the
back of geothermal-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, energy systems that we, we only do in, in a couple of places.
Kawarau is an excellent example, as is the Tuoro Paki
system at, at Mokai. Uh, there
is... There needs to be planning off the back of
our geothermal systems to
re-establish where some of our industries take place, whether it's new industries
like data centers or it's old industries like drying wood or glass
houses or what have you.
Yeah.
But we need, we need a confirmed system
of, uh, probably greater size than we've got at the moment to, to
enable that, uh, a geothermal energy system to enable that to happen.
All right. Niu Brambry from Kushla Tangari Manuhu. Thank you, Madam Chair. Morena.
Morena.
Did you not see me- I did. ... intervene? It's in the order.
You indicate. Sorry, I just said I- In the... Okay. Right.
It's in the order you indicate, so I'm being very, very fair here.
So... We can have this crap
later. (laughs)
Morena. By the way, you're on my list. Morena.
So, I have the wonderful privilege of representing Ikaroa-Rawhiti,
which, um, covers many beautiful regions of New
Zealand. And we've talked about unemployment, and
sadly, unemployment is up 78% in the Hawke's Bay and
Gisborne. Can you point me to any specific projects that are
happening to address the economic development of those
regions?
Um,
the, um... There's water storage
projects. Uh, there's, uh, flood bank-
Can you tell me sp- the details of each project please?
Okay, so the water storage projects are the, um,
Makaari Aquifer in Gisborne, uh, recharge
aqua- aquifer, uh, the, the... There's
ongoing work for the Ngaruoro Water Storage Project in the
Hawke's Bay.
Mm-hmm.
And we are continuing to work with the
promoters of what was the old Tukutuki Water Storage
Project in, um, Central Hawke's Bay.
That is a huge project. Uh, it would
solve the, um-... the
drinking water and irrigation challenges of Central Hawke's
Bay, uh, as, um, as they currently face
them with the increasing droughts
in- in- in summer. But that is a challenging project, it- it got
stopped, uh, uh, several years ago when the
Supreme Court found in favor of the, um, forest
and bird challenge. Those issues have been addressed.
It has been, uh, reshaped somewhat, um, to ensure
that there's better water flow, uh, through the- through the river to- to
protect the awa and the species there.
We're working with DOC to, uh, do the land swap, which everybody
agreed was, uh, uh, of benefit to DOC at the end of the
day. Um, the- the flood protection programs
in the- in, um, in the bay and also in
Gisborne continue. Um, they're not part of tranche two that
was funded initially, but they're part of tranche three.
Some of those stop bank programs are restorative of-
after Cyclone Gabrielle. Um, there have been some
decisions made recently by ministers that will be announced shortly, which are
further economic development major projects in
the, uh, Hawke's Bay area. Um,
Tairāwhiti received quite a lot of money under the, um,
the- the Provincial Growth Fund and also the Regional Strategic Partnership
Fund, and those benefits continue to flow through, but there's more work to be
done.
Mm-hmm.
Um, but their- their primary produce, their wood processing
sector are in good shape as a result of that, and we
continue to see even the Jucan plant, which was closed in
Gisborne, is now a- a new owner there and they're looking to
create slightly different wood products, uh, which we think could be of
benefit not just to- to Tairāwhiti, but the broader North
Island.
Thank you for raising that. Um, north of Tokomaru
Bay, um, forests are still finding the
expense of getting to Gisborne, either to port or to
Jucanisho, prohibitive. So, what support is there for
them?
Uh, the forestry sector in- in,
um- um Tairāwhiti is challenging.
It is.
Uh... And there are things in place, um, at-
that MPI are working on through the- their forestry
group. Uh, but there's also a large part that local government has
to play in that. Um, and historically, that
road up the coast has been terrible.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, and it's-
That's my road home (laughs) .
It- it suffers every time there's a major storm.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, I can't remember which fund it was, whether it was the PGF or the
RSPF, there was a- there was a program or there was a project to actually
bring in a barging facility-
Mm-hmm.
... either at Hicks Bay or Te Urewera-
... to take some of the heavy freight off the- off the roads, whether it
was carcasses, logs, uh, or whatever, uh, that
did not proceed. Um,
I think some ministers still think that that should
happen. Um,
I doubt that there's headroom within the current RAF program to be able
to do that. But that's the long-term challenge
for the road to Ruatoria, is that it's not- it's
not adequate to deal with the freight that currently, historically,
nor is expected to use it in the future.
I appreciate your appreciation of our challenges up there.
(laughs)
And you've mentioned MPI are working...
Because the Minister of Forestry s- said a lot about innovation,
but couldn't actually point me to one innovation that's happening up the
coast. But you've given me a bit of hope in mentioning MPI working
on something. Can you tell me what that is?
Or-
No, I think you need to talk to them on that.
Okay, but- but
it's just that you mentioned it, so...
Well, uh, in- insofar as the mini- the forestry
sector is part of MPI, it's not part of MB.
But it is part, definitely part of regional development, economic
development. That's why you mentioned it. You actually raised it. I didn't.
Uh, no. Uh, well, I'm sorry if I confused you, but forestry is not a
dedicated sector that is being supported under the Regional Development
Infrastructure
Okay, so what can you tell me about why you raised MPI's
initiatives? 'Cause-
I'm sayin'-
... you got me interested-
(laughs)
... and- and hopeful (laughs) .
So-
You did ask a question.
... I- I thought, uh,
I thought that the question related to the harvesting of forests-
Yes.
... in the Tairāwhiti.
Yeah.
Okay, that is not something that was- uh, that is in- within our mandate
to either promote or undertake. The only part that- that the
Regional Infrastructure Fund has supported has been the processing of
logs through the support that we provided to the sawmill
and to the, uh, engineering, uh, lumber industry
al- alongside the sawmill in Gisborne.
All right. Uh, thank you. We have a new primary from Dr. Wenitone.
Okay.
Thank
you. Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, this, uh, the
idea of regional development, um, and all of the d- various different
funds, um, has been quite interesting-
Mm-hmm.
... and, um, the Auditor General being interested in the past.
One of the questions I've always had is how do you make those decisions about which
projects within those funds, uh, get supported
and which ones, um, are ignored? What's the process behind it?
How can we be assured about the transparency, rah-dee-rah?
You'll love this.
Just try and keep it short. (laughs)
Thanks- thanks very much, Dr. Wenitone.
Et cetera.
Yes.
So, uh, the criteria-
Mm-hmm.
... for the fund is approved by cabinet.
Uh, this fund has quite, um, specific criteria in
terms of the sectors it would support.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, within that, there is a- a well-established
process within my group of how applications are
received, the information that's required-
Mm-hmm.
... how they're processed, the due diligence that's undertaken on-...
um, the applicant, the project, uh, where it fits within the
system, uh, its impact on similar sorts of
businesses, uh, whether it is a, uh, uh,
an- a business, an established business, whether this is a growth
part of the business that- that, um,
that needs to be supported by the Crown.
Why can't they get funding from other parts-
Mm-hmm.
... of, uh, the capital market system?
We're there to crowd in the private sector, not crowd it out.
Yeah.
Uh, so there's an extensive evaluation and due diligence process that-
... we must work through.
Yeah.
Uh, there is prioritization in terms of what can be,
um, undertaken in the near term, as opposed, um, to, you
know, multiple years away. So, long-term
feasibility studies, long-term development projects are not
something that we would prioritize.
And then we present those investment proposals to ministers, who
then make the decisions.
Mm-hmm.
And if it's over 35 million, it goes to Cabinet.
Also, if there are projects that don't fit within the specific
criteria, but ministers feel them, um,
meritorious, then they will go-
Yeah.
... to Cabinet as well.
Mm-hmm.
So, if I can just clarify and understand.
So there would be a suite of options- Mm-hmm. ...
that would come to either ministers or the Cabinet, uh, and we
rely on pretty s- um, clear, transparent
processes within Cabinet, um, and that, the integrity of
that to be able to ensure that those decisions that are made are- are
made well. Um,
there- there's been allegations previously that there's been problems in- in that
area. Um, is there anything that, um
... I'm not asking you
to double-
(laughs)
... to- to guess that, but is there anything that could compromise the information
that they get, um, uh, from MBIE? Is there anything
you think that is required that's missing or that you need further
to be able to add?
I- I'll-
I- I was just gonna say, before Robert goes there.
Um, I've become more obviously involved in this in the last few weeks.
The processes that I've witnessed Robert's team and been involved in with Robert's
team are absolutely rigorous. Um, the amount of
information that is provided
(laughs)
... to us to research, the amount of due diligence they're going through, the
considerations, um, I would say when the discussions are happening within
MBIE are very free and frank around the table.
Mm-hmm.
Um, Robert is very open to his team giving him, uh, uh, how would I
put it? Unrestrained views, um, and making sure that we have all the data
in front of us. So, uh, I would say, you can talk about more about the detail, but
having witnessed it, it's really, really rigorous.
It's-
Mm-hmm.
... um, quite intense. (laughs)
Thank- thank you, Suzanne.
All right.
From the outset, we- we had a- an advisory
panel established right back in the days of the Provincial Growth Fund, who were
people from the private sector that had experience at- at- at a regional
level-
Mm-hmm.
... and at a sector level. And we've preserved that as the holding
company was established-
Yeah. ... with the board members that- that participate, that all projects before they go
to ministers, go to that- that-
Right.
... board of directors for independent views.
Uh, if it's a forestry-related project, we will always get advice from-
(laughs) ... the forestry sector within MPI. If it's a transport project ...
So we work across-
Mm-hmm.
... the government agencies. We also take soundings from,
uh, industry bodies-
Mm-hmm.
... um, whether- whether it's in the primary sector or not, to ensure that we've
got the best set of advice to go to- to ministers before those decisions are
made.
Thanks so much.
Uh, new, uh, question from, uh, Honorable Janine Anderson.
Uh, thank you. I'm just interested in the- the RIFF, the framework-
Right.
... that was Regional Infrastructure Fund framework.
Um,
h- how is that framework used to understand value for
money? So, um, d- do you sort of go back and assess
what you did and say ... Or- or is there a process to know whether that was a good
spend or not?
Yeah.
And- and- and if, and- and I'm- I'm kind of asking this because, do you include,
say, you talked about roads already, but there are some parts of New Zealand where
geographically building a road is going to be really tough in the future-
Mm-hmm. ... I'm thinking of Northland.
Yeah.
And, you know, we could be pouring hundreds of millions of dollars into trying to
build a road on something that might not be
strong enough to hold a road. D- do you use that framework to look at, is that a
good spend? We need one. What else could be happening in that region for-
Yeah.
... infrastructure that ... Sorry, it's a long-winded question, but I think you
can-
No, thank you very much-
...
definitely get it. ... Ms. Anderson. Um, so the fund is only one
p- this fund was only $1.2 billion.
It was never ever gonna tackle those big projects.
Yeah.
So we've done no roads.
The roads that were done under previous programs were regional roads
or council roads, so local government roads.
Yeah.
Right? So they tended to be minor. But you work with- you work with the Ministry of
Transport and NZTA-
Mm-hmm.
... to use their brains around-
Yeah.
... whether this makes sense to- to- to upgrade this road or
reroute it, right? Um,
so all- all proposals that go forward
have identified benefits that have been interrogated by the team.
So whether it's, uh, numbers of people working in the- on the construction of the
project, long-term jobs that follow off the back of the completion of
that project, uh, the additionality it might bring to the
region, and that- that could be the case where,
um,
y- you know, you- you start a sawmill, and off the back of that you get somebody
that then starts a business that manufactures products like posts or fencing
or- or whatever it is.
Mm-hmm.
Um, there's, uh, a question around whether that's the best use of capital
compared to, um, or sorry, whether- whether the Crown's capital
is- is, uh, replacing other capital that should
be-
Mm-hmm. ... available and why isn't it available?
Mm-hmm.
Particularly if it's from shareholders.
And then as the- as the-... program of regional developments
progressed, you, you see trends but you, you're constantly
moni-monitoring. So, even the projects that started back in 2019
that, uh, sit on the Crown Regional Holdings book, they are
month-monitored every month. There's interactions with the, with the
companies or with the trusts that are develop, develop, developing those
projects to understand that the benefits are flowing-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, and that what they promised or what they stated in their application is
actually becoming manifest.
Mm-hmm. And, and do... What you learn from that, is that taken forward?
So, a-a-and-
Ye- ... and is that region-specific? 'Cause I'm a-thinking that wha-what may work well
in one part of the country- Mm.
... m- might not able to be applied somewhere else.
Mm-hmm. Yes, absolutely.
Okay.
Yeah, yeah. And you're quite right.
You know, the water storage projects in Northland have a totally different
persona, perspective, and, um, probable
set of users compared to those in Canterbury and, and
Otago.
Do, do you kind of look at, um, sort of increase in wages and
employment? Is that part of what you look at when those, those, um-
Partic-
... when the, the framework's in place?
Particularly for
where businesses have been funded, um, we
see a, a new business or an expanded business,
um... I mean, Leaderbrand in, in Gisborne would
be an example. There was a project, uh, funded under the Provincial
Growth Fund to put 11 hectares under covered
shade houses.
Mm-hmm.
I mean, they're, they're two stories high.
It's a significant tubular steel and, and, and, uh,
breathable membrane that they built these things with, but what it did,
uh,
a-a-as well as increase the, uh, number of, uh, rotations of crops that
were harvested off those, off those fields, um,
the benefit it had to the, um, to the people was that their all their
back-breaking jobs went because of the way they laid these, the fields out
inside the shade houses. They could mechanize it all.
So, the back-breaking work went. They brought in sophisticated harvesting
machines. People got better jobs, higher
wages-
Mm-hmm.
... because the productivity from that 11 hectares increased significantly
and the costs were reduced. Less pesticide.
You didn't have birds coming in and fouling.
You had different ways of regenerating the soil after the six or seven
crops had been cut-
Mm-hmm.
... from the spinach or the lettuce or whatever it was.
So, um, that's been successful on
multiple factors and not just a loan that's been repaid.
Thank you. And just-
And-
... one more question.
So, actually just to add, um, there's a, a really significant link
with MSD here. So the-
Mm-hmm, yes. ... the team works very closely with MSD to try and activate, um, people on
benefit. Uh, and, um, the last numbers I saw were that there were actually
no immigrants that had been used in the RIF projects
because they've been able to source local employment, so there's a very strong
link, yeah.
L- That's great. And that is something we do measure, so...
Yeah.
When you're sort of applying, looking at opportunity of, of where to-
Mm-hmm.
... where that would go, um,
I mean, for example, I recently visited Tokoroa-
Mm-hmm.
... which has had two major closures.
And off the back of that, um, their, their, their local kind of trade
training's also lost like 60 jobs out of
people. So, so not only is there a reduction in available
employment, but there's, there's a reduction in, in available spaces for
training if people want to take up those opportunities because there's no work.
Yes.
Do you ever sort of look at pockets of New Zealand, in r- regional New Zealand,
that are particularly doing it tough, and, and there might not
be other investors there, there might not be necessarily opportunities,
but is a need there? Does, does that factor in at all?
Yeah, absolutely. So, well, uh,
historically we, we've taken the view that Wellington doesn't know best, and that
we wait for the regions to come to us with their good ideas on what they'd like to
do, because if there's not regional support for something,
uh, it tends to wither and die, right?
Mm-hmm.
So that's, that's almost a foundational stone of the, the way the regional economic
development por- portfolio has been built over the years.
But you can't... It's always been flexible.
We- you can't be hard and fast around it, and ministers are of this view, so I'm
not, I'm not speaking just for MBIE here.
Uh, there will be instances that do arise where you need to say, "W- we
need to do something here."
Uh, and the forestry processing sector
in the middle of the North Island is one area-
Mm-hmm.
... where the government has said that they are
working with the companies to try and see whether there is some
solution that only the government can provide-
Mm-hmm.
... to, uh, ensure that we don't have the de-
... de-industrialization of, um, that big-
Coughing.
... wood processing sector in the middle of the North Island.
All right, we go to Dr. Hamish Campbell.
Excellent, brilliant. Um,
and I appreciate the answers you've given already for re-
regional, uh, economic development.
What role do you see tourism playing for, in the regions for the economic
development?
Do we-
Yeah, uh-
Do you want me to go first?
No, um, I might invite, um, Nora-
(laughs)
... up here as well who's our general manager of, um, tourism.
Um, I think, uh, when we look at our major events, for
example, um, we'll certainly be looking at, um, what is the,
the regional dispersal of, uh, of that activity.
So that's one direct way that, uh, ministers, um,
can, can look to support, um, tourism ac-
across the regions.
There's been, if I might add, there's, um-
Yeah.
... so I think it was a 70 million program, yeah?
With-
$70 million.
For the-
Tourism.
... events package?
Yes, that's right.
Which Nora-
Sorry, Nora.
... is about to talk to as well.
The only other thing I would add is that the ministers have agreed that there is a
regional air connectivity package that is available to our smaller
airlines.
Mm-hmm.
And they are critical to the tourism industry, uh, particularly into the
more remote parts of New Zealand, including the West Coast.
But Nora, would you like to add on that?
Sure, yeah. So the... We've had quite a bit of investment, um, from a regional
perspective in tourism this year.
Um, so we started off, uh, early in the year with our regional tourism
boost round one.
Mm-hmm.
Um, and that put three million, um, funded from the IVL into
six different marketing campaigns for different regions, and the-The
aim of that investment is to bring international visitors into
different regions. And what was really important for us in putting that money into
the regions is that regions actually collaborate across, so you
get the biggest impact. So we had, um, we had regions working together,
Top of the North, for example, in Rotorua, led out of Rotorua.
Um, we've had, uh, Central North Island, Nelson and Marlborough
collaboration. We also had a Central South Island collaboration, the Top of
the South and the Bottom of the South, as well as, as a
Tātaki, um, Auckland Unlimited, um, led investment.
And then we followed that up recently with a second round of the regional
tourism boost. Um, we've, uh, got phase one, um,
announced and there's a phase two coming.
So we're focusing quite a lot on how do we encourage the regions to
collaborate and to make the most, um, and align that with the national, um,
objective of bringing more international visitors to, to N- New Zealand.
So that's been the recent investments.
So-
Yes?
Uh, I... Okay, a quick sub here.
Um, so with, with those funds, are they directly for, um,
economic development, um, organizations in that area or are they for
actual operators operating in those regions?
So they are collaborations led by our regional tourism organizations.
So that's the, the, the umbrella organizations that work together and then we
f- encourage those organizations to come together at a more macro level,
um, to collaborate. So the focus is really around, um, bringing
in more international visitors. So it's been around how do you promote
good itineraries? How do you, um, promote regional approaches, um, in the
tourism space and spread it out of the, the, the traditional
centers?
Yeah, sub.
How, how does that tie in with the tourism growth roadmap for all of
the, for all of the country?
Yeah, so the tourism growth roadmap that was launched in June, um,
has a really clear, um, short and then a long-term focus.
So in the short term, we're obviously trying to recover back to our 2019
visitor levels, um, so that's a big focus area.
And so the regional tourism boosts, that is part of
encouraging, um, encouraging those numbers, but thinking really
strategically, not just at a national level.
Thinking about how do you also get the benefits out into different parts of
the, of, of the country. So the tourism growth
roadmap, um, has an, an investment plan that happens each year
that underpins it and so we've really clearly focused, um, up to,
um, July, uh, we focused on spending, um, money
on the demand side of the, of, um, of the tourism
system. And so the, the tourism boost is a really important part of that.
And we keep spending on that at the moment because we're still recovering
back, but we're starting to also focus on the, uh, what we call the
supply side. So this is the infrastructure side-
Mm-hmm.
... and so forth, um, workforce, other things.
So that's where we're shifting over time, um, in the, in the tourism space.
So the regional, the regional angle is an important one as well as that national,
um, approach. Yeah.
Just one quick one.
Um, okay, one more supplementary,
Chris?
How are our tourist numbers going given that we want to get back
to our
2019 numbers?
Yeah, so we're at about 88%, um, for the year
ending September, so that's, uh, encouraging. Um, we're seeing that upward trend.
So obviously we've got a bit, a bit to go, but we're, we're s- we're
cautiously optimistic that, um, we're, we're on a good track there.
Obviously different markets are recovering back differently, so we're not
seeing the same patterns of, um, international visitors that we had
previously. So, um, our US market is looking good.
Our Australian market is looking good.
Um, we're seeing less so the recovery from China and so there's been, um,
particular emphasis around what can we do in that market to encourage,
um, some of the visitation from China to recover back as well.
So, um, yeah, about 88% at the moment and, um, it's looking
positive for the summer.
I can, I can just-
It might be worth mentioning... Sorry, I was just gonna say, it might be worth
mentioning, uh, the changes we've made to the visitor visa to allow
transit through Australia-
Hmm.
... that's helped increase numbers.
I was, I was
just about to- Sorry, great minds think alike.
(laughs) ... I was just about to add that. Yeah.
'Cause, 'cause it is, that is the mark, China is the market that's down.
That's, that's at 60% of 2019 levels, whereas, you know, th- the US is at
104%. So, uh, it is different by market.
It's not just a New Zealand story for China.
That's actually a, you know, a global story that, um, tourism from China is down.
Sarah, if there's-
Okay, okay, so that was your final supplement.
Yeah.
I think there is a supplementary, Kushner.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
(laughs)
Now this is exciting (laughs) -
Yeah. ... because the East Coast might not have a sawmill to justify infrastructure, but
we have Mount Hikurangi and we have the first sunrise in the world.
Yeah.
So what work is being developed there
that can support the bigger picture of infrastructure
development on the East Coast?
I can't give you an answer, uh, at that level,
um, here, but we can definitely come back and, and check.
But that's a regional, um, those regional lenses is where we work really closely
with those regional tourism organizations. Yes.
In, in light-
And,
Okay, that was your follow-up,
yeah. I, I just want to continue because Gisborne is not the East Coast.
It's not where Hikurangi is. It's two and a half hours northeast of Gisborne
and I know they're already struggling with the, the, um, cruise
itinerary is not what it was intended to be.
But if we're talking about infrastructure, I can accept there's no sawmill, I can
accept that. But like I said, there's Mount Hikurangi and the first
sunrise in the world. So this is a real opportunity
for us to take some infrastructure to support that and of course support New
Zealand, because-
It's not
No offense, Gizzy. It's called Te
Uranga-o-te-ra for a reason actually, Vanessa
Weening.
Um, it's, it's not.
No offense to-
The
first place in the world. Gisborne. They know that, that the Tairawhiti, Mount Hikurangi
is where the ura hits the mountain first.
And that's something we can sell to the world.
Okay, right. So, members, now we move on-
What's that? Excuse me, Madam Chair. What is the member saying to me?
I'm saying that -
Why are you talking to me? Talk to the chair.
Members, can you, members, can you put everything through the chair.
Yes.
So, um, okay. We are moving on to-
(laughs)
... we are... Hold on, hold on.
Moving on to part number three now.
(laughs)
Yeah.
Uh, which is energy markets. Hold on, members.
Can only one member speak at a time?
Yeah, yeah.
And if you have a point of
Do you know what uda means?
H- Hold on.
(laughs)
Listen, if you don't behave, I will not give you a question.
I'm behaving.
All right, moving
on. All right, so moving on to part three.
Thank you.
With respect, Chair.
Uh, part three. Hold on, we're moving on to part three now.
Part three.
Yes, it said that I had a primary long before Hamish.
That doesn't matter.
Oh, okay.
So, part three, members. Just to remind you, it's energy markets, energy
security, and fuel resilience-
I am.
... and economic productivity.
Just making it clear. Um, any questions for this
section?
Right, yeah.
Scott Willis. Yeah.
Cool. What?
Google it. You Google it.
Hold on, hold on, hold on.
All right. Scott Willis, you start with your
question.
Thank you. So, so we're onto energy.
We're back to energy. (laughs)
(laughs) Um,
would, uh, would MBIE describe the market as functional and,
uh, competitive when we've got four gentailers who control
90% of the market share?
That's a start.
Yep. So, uh, you'll be aware, we did a review of
electricity market performance this year.
Uh, the review found that the market's performing
pretty well in, uh, many respects.
So particularly the delivery of renewables.
Renewable pipeline is booming. Um,
but there is a really serious problem, um, and the
review was clear that the government needs to take action to address the really
serious problem of a lack of investment in dry year
cover. So that's the, the generation that can step
in and provide cover for kind of weeks and months, not for, not for
short-term periods. Um, and so that's the fundamental problem and
that's where our, uh, forward-looking work program is focused.
So supplementary. So if your forward, forward-looking work program is
focused on ensuring that there's dry year cover-
Mm-hmm.
... but currently we are seeing industries
de-industrializing. We're seeing the closure of industries,
not solely, but significantly as a, as a
response to high electricity
prices. We're also seeing households
in great difficulty, having to choose between heating and eating.
Mm-hmm.
This is, this is something that the consumers are very, very aware
of, that the New Zealand public's very a- aware of.
So while it's great to see MBIE looking
for the dry year problem,
what are you doing for people here and now to reduce electricity prices and for
industry here and now?
So there is a direct link between that dry year cover-
Oh, yeah.
... and affordability. So I'd say in terms of affordability, we're focused in three
main areas. Um, so first is the dry year cover, which I'll talk
about that link in a sec. Um, secondly, um,
getting that renewable pipeline underway because the faster we can deliver
renewables, the quicker those prices will come down.
Um, and then thirdly, kind of giving consumers
the, uh, better ability to control their own costs, um, and kind of put
the power back in the hands of consumers.
Um, so on the dry year cover, that is directly impacting
affordability. We saw in 2024 the impact of a
lack of dry year cover on spot prices, but it's
actually affecting prices in every year because that, that dry year risk
is factoring into the forward prices and that's what ends up in consumer's
bills. So we really need to address dry year to, um,
support affordability. Um, on
renewables, uh, yeah, the quicker we can get more renewables
built, the faster prices will come down.
We need to get that supply and demand into balance as quickly as possible.
Uh, so we've been working with the Ministry for the Environment on VRM
reforms to help un- unlock the consenting of
renewables. We're developing, uh, the new national
policy statement for renewable energy to ensure that decision makers
are really taking account of the benefits of, uh, energy
generation when they're making their consenting decisions.
Uh, you'll be aware there's lots of energy projects in the, uh, fast track,
uh, process. And, uh,
thirdly, um, we're progressing the legislation around offshore renewable
energy. And just my, the third one is the
kind of putting the power back in the hands of the consumers.
Um, we are doing a whole lot of work to reduce barriers to
rooftop solar. Uh, we know, uh, EK evidence
shows that households can save $1,000 a year with rooftop
solar. So, uh, we're removing barriers like,
uh, um- Consenting is one of them. Consenting is one of
them. Uh, lessening the voltage limits so that rooftop
solar can feed more back into the grid.
Uh, being clear that you don't need a building consent to have
rooftop solar, things like that. We're progressing work on a consumer
data right for electricity. Um, and
the EA, you, uh, might be aware, is introducing, uh, lots
of changes so that consumers are better rewarded when they feed
energy back into the grid.
Okay, thank you. There's lots there, but I'll-
(laughs)
Yeah, we can come back to you, Scott.
... say, great.
Sorry. Thank you. So we have a, a supplementary from, uh, Dr. Megan Woods.
Thank you. And thank you for that. Um, you talk about that dry year cover
being one of the critical things directly, um,
impacting affordability for households and for industry.
Of course, the work on storage, that dry year cover in the form of the New
Zealand battery project was canceled at the outset of this government.
What workstreams have been put in place to, to, um,
replace and continue looking at options that
will ultimately make electricity more affordable for New Zealand
households and businesses?
Yep. So on the dry year cover front, uh, two, the
government made two announcements this year, um,
on work specifically to address the dry year problem.
So firstly, we, uh, MBie has kicked off a procurement process
for LNG imports, uh, and that is to
really address the problem of, uh, the rapid decline in gas
production. So the, the constraint on our electricity
system right now in terms of electricity dry year is a lack
of fuel. We actually have enough generation kit to cover a dry
year. We just, um, don't have enough fuel to run it.
So that's the focus on LNG.
Sorry, just before you go into the second one, what will be the megawatt per hour
cost of, um, electricity generated from
LNG?
Uh, it's about $200 to $250 a megawatt hour.
Okay, so we'll keep electricity expensive for New Zealand households and
businesses because what's the current long run marginal cost of
electricity?
Uh, the average is about 180-
Right.
... but-
So it will elevate prices?
No, not necessarily. So, um, the effect of having LNG in the
system, if it's only used in a dry year, would be to cap prices
in effect at that level, $200 to $250 a megawatt hour
when it's used. Whereas as you saw in 2024, those spot
prices were getting up to $890 a megawatt hour.
So just in terms of the volume of the LNG that you're currently looking at,
those prices of 250, uh, what's the
capacity? I understand it's quite a small scheme, and what will it be equivalent
cover to?
So the request, uh, for information, the procurement process
asked for schemes that could deliver 12 PJ over three
months. Uh, the proposals just came in a week or two
ago, and we have a commercial and technical team assessing those at the moment.
So I don't have the detail of the actual proposals that came in, but all of them
had to meet that 12 PJ over three months, which
delivers, um, 1.5 gigawatt hours of
electricity, um, which was what was kind of when we
set up the procurement determined that's what would be potentially needed in a dry
year situation.
Thank you. And sorry, there was another work stream.
Keep going.
I think your second point-
What was-
... which you were going to mention. Yeah.
Oh. (laughs)
Um, back,
back before you got distracted.
Apologies.
Yeah.
(laughs) Um, so the government has asked us to,
uh, work on setting up a new regulatory regime so that in the future
the sector itself doesn't let us get into a situation
where, um, we don't have enough cover for a dry year.
So just to clarify, uh, Madam Chair, so that's the extent
of the, the dry year work, um, that you're currently
undertaking?
The other two priorities for MBie on the dry year
problem, uh, you'll be aware the government also, um, gave
a clear message to the mixed ownership model companies that they should
bring forward any proposals, uh, for firming generation
to address that kind of, um, perceived barrier to investment that
the, that those mixed ownership model companies, they might not get
equity for investment. So that's the other thing, but that's not an MBie-
So just in terms of, um, how this all fits into an
energy strategy, where are we at in seeing the, um,
overarching energy strategy? When's that due?
So we're not currently working on an energy strategy.
So it's, work has stopped on the energy strategy?
So the government has decided to revisit next year whether or not
there is a need for an energy strategy given the,
uh, announcement on the 1st of October on
the, the 10 actions to, um, address
energy affordability.
So what will be the criteria about whether or not New Zealand needs an energy
strategy? Is it people not being able to heat their houses?
Is it New Zealand de-industrializing?
What will be the trigger for, for, um, for the government to decide
whether or not we need an energy strategy, which in,
with all due respect, has been sitting on the minister's desk since the day the
minister took office?
I think that's a question for the minister.
That's fair, fair call.
All right, a supplementary from Scott Willis.
Thank you. And, and coming back to the dry year question, um,
this is not really a surprise. We've known for a long time that
we have the dry year issue, and in fact,
we've, we've been also looking for market solutions for 30
years. So, uh, to talk to
my colleague's question about the
options we're looking at, the minister has said
we're going to look at other... we're going to assist the, the, the
gen tailors, the mixed ownership model, um,
operators to invest, but they're not
investing yet in that firming
options. You, the, the, the battery
project had that portfolio approach.
Mm-hmm.
Do you think there's merit in finalizing that
portfolio approach?
And, and will that be something that can be done through
MBie?
Um, yeah, I completely agree. The dry year problem has been a longstanding
problem. Um, I think what has really
exacerbated it is the rapid decline in gas supply.
So, um, gas production in 2025 is
half what we predicted it would be just three years ago.
And so as I mentioned, you know, we've, we've got enough
generation, we don't have the fuel to run it.
So that's, that's what's exacerbated, uh, the situation at the
moment. In terms of a portfolio approach, um, as part of our work
on LNG, um, we are giving advice
to the government on what is like before they make a decision
on LNG to make sure it is a robust decision.
We're looking across the board at what is the range of options that could address
the dry year problem. So we're in the process of giving that advice.
Okay. And if I could just come back, you also mentioned that you were working on a
national...... policy statement for renewable electricity
generation. Now we, we had been told that this was going to be delivered
last June, last year. Um,
what, why, why is, is, why are we still waiting?
Where is the national policy statement for renewable electricity generation?
I believe it is being delivered this month, but I will, I will,
write to the committee to correct that if that's not correct.
Ah.
But I believe it is being delivered.
So only a year and a- a half late. Is that
right? The national policy statement for renewable electricity generation?
I don't have the detail on when it was first due.
I know that the team has, um, been consulting, uh,
widely on the draft of the national policy statement, so I think that time has
been spent in getting it right, and actually consulting on the exposure
draft.
Okay, so a year and a half late if it comes this month.
That's great.
Um, a new primary from Dr. McGinnis.
Thank you. Um, I just want to, um, turn to the Gas Security
Fund. Um, the $200 million fund-
Mm-hmm.
... in the budget. Um, one of the things that
I'm just interested in is that, um, when it was first
announced, there was a signal that expression of interests were opening and the
desire w- was to move quickly. So how many projects are currently
in the pipeline? And what is the total value of money sought
relative to the $200 million available?
Um-
Katherine?
Thanks, I can speak to that. So, uh, the government made its announcement last
month i- in October on the Gas Security Fund, and it will be opening
shortly.
Sorry?
And it will be opening shortly for expressions of interest.
So it's not open. So it was announced at budget, but it's n-
there are no current expressions of interest ???
So early market engagement has been undertaken.
And, uh, Robert, I'll ask you to join us if you want to speak a bit to the process
with
Eli.
It's where you see joined-up MB in action.
(laughs)
Thanks, Katherine. Um, so the, the apparatus
to, to, uh, manage, uh, the investment of that $200 million
is, is in place, Dr. Woods. Um,
and, uh, the, we're just waiting for final, um,
sign-off by ministers before the, uh, portal to receive the
EOIs goes live. We had expected that to occur this
week, uh, and I'm still hopeful that by Friday that will be the
case.
So when are you expecting to see, uh, firmed-up expressions of
interest?
Very shortly thereafter. I mean, clearly there is a relatively
small number of players that we would expect to have an interest
in, um, a- accessing this fund, and there has been some
discussions already with them.
So who have the discussions been with?
Uh, I don't think we can say that at this stage.
Okay. Um, have those discussions been with the, between the minister
and companies or with officials?
Uh, both.
Okay. Um, will it, will a list of who the minister, um,
and officials have been meeting with for this early stage, um,
discussions, will that be released?
Um, I can't answer that at this stage.
Right. Um, will a criteria, a more deta- um, at the time
that the money was announced at budget, there was no worked-out
criteria around the fund. Um, when will we see
what the, the decision-making criteria for allocation of
funds?
Mm. So the Cabinet paper, which has been proactively released from October,
sets out the structure for the fund and the expansion of its scope to
include both the short and the medium term and the long-term investments.
Um, the EOI process, when it opens up, will include information around the
application form, um, and the process for assessing those applications.
And that will have the detailed criteria for decision making?
Yes.
Because we're yet to see that.
So the advice, um ... Well, the, the budget papers and the
business case material that came out entitled
focusly on on increasing fossil gas
supply. Um, was advice given to ministers on
alternatives? So multi-option comparators around demand
side efficiency, electrification or renewable gas
alternatives, and other ways in which that money could
be used.
So the business case, which company, the Cabinet paper's also been released.
That's, um, fully available online.
Um, but those decisions on the gas fund were also taken alongside the wider energy
package, which has progressed through the years.
So in terms of the range of other, uh, technologies and fuel
sources, um, have been looked at, uh, in parallel by-
No, I, I, I understand what was in the Cabinet paper-
Mm.
... and in the budget papers.
It was all on supply side. What I'm asking, in working up
that, um, that package and making a decision for a
budget bid around $200 million-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, was alternative advice given to ministers
around efficiency, um,
switching, um, alternative gases,
electrification? Was alternative advice given to ministers?
Mm. So Sharon, you might want to comment a bit more on this detail, but there's
been a, a series of advice that has been provided to ministers around the range of
problems facing the energy market, and that includes those topics that you're
mentioning around electrification, around, uh, the
de-industrialization side as well.
Uh, so there's a range of papers that are available and, uh, when the energy
package is released publicly, in terms of the proactive release, that advice, uh,
around the-
Okay. ... the entirety of the energy market-
Yeah, but specifically in relation to that $200 million. Sorry.
It's just I'm unclear whether you're saying that advice was
specifically given in, in terms of alternative uses of the
$200 million. I understand there's a range of different advices given to
various energy ministers, uh, but in relation to the
budget bid for that $200 million, was, were
alternatives put up? We know what the problem was in terms of
policy formation. Uh, w- were alternatives for the use of
that money put up?
So the advice we provided on the fund has been proactively released.
It is available.
Okay. All right, um, uh, further questions for, uh, Dr.
D- David Wilson, are you primary?
Thank you, Chair. Um, (clears throat) I'm interested in, you know, the
applications for industry use and, in particular, where industry needs
uninterrupted power supply-
Okay.
... or intense base load. And, um, I'm a little
bit worried that solar and wind are not going to provide those.
And, um, but, and I do understand that offshore
wind has some potential in that area, um, so I'd like some
advice around that. Um, also, the fact that we're going to need
a lot of batteries if we're going to cut across,
um, supplying that kind of base load that we need.
And (clears throat) all of those things looked a little bit precarious to me.
Mm-hmm.
So, offshore wind, and
why are we not looking at hydro?
Mm-hmm. Cool. Thanks. Um, yeah,
we need, we need more solar, wind,
geothermal, hydro, uh, potentially
gas-fired generation. Um, we need all of those.
So actually, the more renewables we can get onto the system, the more
it displaces the base load. Um, and so,
um, most forecasts show us getting to 95%
renewable on the path that we're on by 2030.
Um, so that actually, even in a dry year, you're using, um,
less thermal, uh, reduces the need for fossil fuel
backup. Um,
offshore renewable energy, uh, yes, could play a really important
role. It still isn't base load. I think it's got a, um, better
capacity factor than onshore wind, um, but it still doesn't
fully play that role. Uh, but I think the answer is we n- we
need more of all. And, oh, you mentioned batteries.
Um, they, they really help with the kind of intraday
firming. So if you've got, um, lots of wind and solar, the
batteries help you get through kind of day to day.
Um, the role that batteries don't play, or certainly under the technology we have
right now, um, is the long duration firming, and
that's why we talked about that dry year cover right at the start of this.
Yeah.
Mm-hmm.
And the second part of the question was around hydro.
Yes, so, um, there are... So obviously, the, the market
is, the market is a market-led market.
Um, lots of operators are actually considering, um, upgrades to
hydro schemes to get the most they can out of them and things like that.
I guess we're, we're limited by the availability
of, you know, New Zealand's geography-
Mm-hmm.
... and the ability to provide further hydro schemes.
Yeah, so you think we're hitting the level of, um, any kind of
optimization that we can get from our hydro schemes?
Uh, I'm, I'm not sure. Some providers are certainly exploring options.
Um,
but there might-
Thank
you. ... be more out there.
Thank you, Chair.
There, there are a couple of... Dr.
Wilson, there are a couple of smooth-sized hydros that have been on the plans for
years, uh, that are being considered at the moment, uh,
under the Regional Infrastructure Fund.
Mm-hmm.
But, but they're, they're small.
Right.
All right. A supplementary, Dr. Megan.
Thank you. Just on offshore wind-
Wow. Thank you.
... um,
that, um, that, uh, Dr. Wilson raised.
So, when the Electrifying New Zealand plan was
released, the new regime for offshore wind was slated
to have the legislation in place by mid-2025,
with the aim of opening the first feasibility permit round in late
2025. Uh, I think we've had the second reading of that
bill.
Mm-hmm, 23-
Um, still has to go through committee stages, so it's a
delayed regime, um, critical to New Zealand's energy
future. What is the new timeline for, for this
work?
Um, so the intention is for the bill to progress through Q1
2026. It's obviously subject to the prioritization across the
legislation program that happens every, um, every calendar
year. Um, and then following that to open the
round very rapidly. So we have been preparing the regulations
alongside the legislation so that we can get those in
place, uh, very quickly, uh, following passage of the law and then
open the round. Um, uh, Catherine's team have been
working on the operational policy-
Mm-hmm. (laughs)
... at the same time, um, in order to be able to stand that up
quickly. So the intention is to open the round, uh, obviously subject to passage of
that legislation, uh, late Q1 2026.
Um, and, uh, the round will follow from there.
Okay.
What legislative priority-
So-
... does that... What, what legislative priority has that bill been
given?
At the moment?
It's got a category two, I understand, but I will correct that
if that's not correct.
Thank you. Appreciate it.
So, so-
Um, just, we've al- just one further side.
Um, you will have been meeting with the offshore, uh, wind
investors. We've already seen one investor withdraw their,
their funding from New Zealand and leave the work they're doing in New Zealand
because the regime isn't re- progressed at the pace
that, that, that the investors were anticipating.
Do you think that there is a danger that more of our
international investors will look to jurisdictions that are actually getting
on and putting in place their regulatory regimes rather than having a
delayed... I mean, not your fault.
The, the government has given this a, a category two prioritization-
So
we refrain from- But is there a danger that international investment will leave-
All right, so members-
New
Zealand? ... just refrain from any speculation.
We can't ask them to speculate stuff, but if there is anything that
you-
But they talk to investors.
... wish to, um, uh... If there is anything that you can res- uh, put in your
response, that's totally fine, but that's what I-
Yeah. ... have for the members, so don't ask them to speculate stuff.
Also, just the timeframe. Timeframes are eminent and MBIE's team are working on it-
Sorry, I can't
hear you. I said timeframes are eminent-
Oh,
okay. ... in terms of the qu- uh, as we've pointed out, in terms of legislation next
year. So I wouldn't anticipate.
Yeah.
Yeah,
But they are delayed.
All right, okay. So, uh, supplementary from Taha.
Yes, yes. Exce- thank you. Can you tell the committee over, over the last couple of
years how much our solar, uh, generation capacity has
increased?
That's where we will need to look up some numbers.
(laughs) So we get you the right numbers.
I can tell you about the rooftop solar installations,
whereas, uh, we have 68,000
as of mid this year, rooftop solar installations.
Uh, and then here we go, that was 60,000 rooftop solar installations.
Uh, were you after that or the grid scale solar megawatt-
More kind of
Mm-hmm.
... solar fa- um, as a whole.
Okay.
Uh, renewables. You talk about being on track, yeah.
Do you have it?
I do have it. Um, sorry, I have to phone a friend.
(laughs) There are 300 to 750 megawatts in the last
few years that have been added to the grid.
On top of?
I don't, couldn't bear with
The next thing.
I'm sure if we-
All right.
Well- ... pause for a few seconds more-
We can
read it. (laughs) ... then maybe another one, (laughs) another piece of information that arrives.
(laughs)
Yeah, yeah. I suppose just looking at the speed in which we're increasing to meet.
Oh.
As well as, why is that?
Yeah.
So do you want to put that as a follow up question?
Yes,
yeah. Yeah, yeah. All right. Good. Thank you. If you could provide that information.
Yes.
Uh, a new primary from spot
I'll just sort of-
One second.
Okay. So I'm going to run this spot list.
Okay. Yeah.
I'm, I'm aware that the community energy fund
has moved from MB across to ECAT.
Mm-hmm.
However, I'm interested in
MB's experience of delivering the community energy fund.
And if you could help us understand how that
worked. Was it
to enable the development of a community or a
civil energy sector as well-
Mm-hmm.
... as projects? Or was it
developed in-house to simply decide what projects would be
prioritized and, and, and how it would work?
So the focus of that fund did shift its priorities from the government
changed. Um, most recently, it has been focused on
resilience, um, opportunities. So particularly in
light of, uh, the cyclones, um, finding
places where spelter and battery can be installed and offer
that resilience to communities to be able to, uh, continue to
operate, um, and, and recover more quickly.
Um, and so that has been where the focus has been in the last 12 to
18 months.
So if I'm correct, MB designed it to,
to deliver solar plus batteries for remote communities, for
Marae, but didn't engage
with the, the, the people on the ground to ask them
what they wanted, how they wanted to-
So
all- ... to run it?
All of those projects I developed in partnership with those
communities. Uh, you, you can't put solar panels (laughs) on a
roof, um, uh, without having
those conversations.
No, no, but let me rephrase that. So the, the criteria was set by government, not
by, not by the sector, not by the community energy sector.
Is that, is that correct?
Um, it certainly has been-
Yeah.
... informed by engagement with community energy partners.
Um, but I would have to come back to you in terms of further history on
that.
Okay. Okay. (laughs)
Yeah. Next follow up. Uh, new project?
Thank you. Just in terms of Electrify New Zealand-
Mm-hmm.
... um, and the, the various bits within that.
It's a very long term target, which I don't think anyone around this table would
disagree with the, with the target there.
Mm-hmm.
But just in terms of the interim capacity or
investment targets that have been set, say, for between
2027, 2030 or 2026 and
2030, are there interim targets that have been
set within that package?
Uh, interim targets have not been set.
What I can say is that more renewable generation
was delivered in the last 18 months than, than, than any
generation-
Sure.
... was delivered in total-
Yep.
... since 2010.
Yep. So-
But they aren't specific.
Yeah.
There aren't specific targets.
So I guess, what I'm getting at is, what is the reporting that is going to be
put in place
annually around additional consented megawatts,
commissioned megawatts and average consent time that is, and that is
actually showing the lead time? Because of course, a lot of what we've
seen-
Yeah.
... installed in the last two years was actually in
planning, um, and being consented five or six years ago.
So it's not a direct result of an Electrify New
Zealand's, uh, policy because the, the planning for those projects
sta- started before the term of this government.
So how are we actually going to
measure whether or not that this package of
policies is shifting the curve? What is the
reporting that MB has put in place to measure and
quantify that?
Yeah. Uh, so the Electricity Authority is, um, constantly
monitoring the pipeline and has ongoing reporting of the pipeline.
Uh, we do reporting to government on the,
um, amount of renewables and electricity generation being delivered through the
Target Nine reporting. That's the, um, the
government's climate change target.
So, um, we've got ongoing reporting to government on that.
So just in terms of, I mean, it's fantastic.
We've had this, you know-
Mm-hmm.
... this bumper coming online of new generation
projects. Um, what was the kind of average timeline of
the planning of most of those projects we've recently seen come
online?
I'll have to get back to you on that.
But multi-year.
It would be, yes-
Yeah. ... the planning process would be multi-year, yeah.
Yeah. So, okay.
What would be really useful, I think, for committee chair is actually to get
some further information around the, the reporting.
I understand-
Mm-hmm. ... that EA's always done their pipeline reporting-
Yep.
... but specifically-
Mm-hmm.
... a target has been set. There aren't any interim targets, um, that
you're working on. So how are we measuring the success or
otherwise of this policy and this expenditure?
I think the committee-
We'll follow up on that.
We'll follow up for the progress report, yeah, on targets.
We'll follow up.
Any more questions from you? Um-
Um, so just, um, you mentioned in there in terms of, um, your
work with the Climate Commission.
Um, and this, I guess, comes to, um, the ne- uh, the kind of
question of how we bring a lot of various pieces of work together.
There's a, a lot of reviews and reports that have been done.
I'm sure you're very-
(laughs)
... aware of that. And the energy system, how we bring all this together.
So in terms of the wider energy
package, how it is that
we make sure that-All of these pieces of work are working
in the same direction, and how MB as part of
the climate minister's, um, group actually reports
its success against the ERP, um, in this area, so
how are you managing to make sure coordination of a lot of
strands?
Yeah.
Mm-hmm.
So our reporting to government on the whole energy package and
it pulling in their direction, um, in terms of the climate targets, that is that
target non-reporting that I mentioned.
Yeah.
Um, the focus on energy
security and en- electricity security-
Mm-hmm. ... and electricity affordability we see as very much
consistent with the government's climate goals because we know we need
affordable and secure electricity in order to promote the
electrification. Um, as I mentioned before, we're on track for the
95% renewable system, so it's really
about making sure that people can afford to electrify-
Yeah.
... um, and can trust that there'll be secure electricity when they do.
Thank you.
All right. Good. Um, no more questions, so we can move on to the next section
which is about skilled people engaged in safe and productive
work.
Thank you. Uh, so, questions, uh, yep, uh, Alex
Allen.
I'll just have to (overlapping dialogue)
(laughs)
You can start.
Thank you. Um, thanks very much. Um,
the thing I'm worried about is toys contaminated with this (overlapping dialogue)
that have been sold to children. Um, so I want to ask you about
the role of MB as system steward, those product safety
regulations and also what is sold in New Zealand, um, acknowledging that
you are not WorkSafe. Um, but, so the first question
I have is about the timing of those notices and what information was
being made available. WorkSafe issued guidance for workplaces
on the 6th of November. Um, rightly, you know, that
was information that workers, um, needed and it was designed
for employees who might be in a situation where they were exposed. Mm-hmm.
But then MB doesn't seem to have provided any public advice for parents, consumers
or schools until the 12th of November.
Yep.
Why was there a six-day gap?
Uh, MB wasn't informed, um, until the
10th, in the afternoon of the 10th, um, I can be categoric on
that as I was the person who was phoned.
(laughs)
Right.
So I know exactly where I was.
Mm-hmm.
Um, and in fact we stood up our response, I think it took me two minutes to
walk from outside the district court into the building.
Um, we stood the response within the service delivery team.
By 9:00 AM the next morning, we had, uh, gathered a whole lot of information.
Obviously we had to ascertain the veracity of the testing, the veracity of the
information. We had to talk to various suppliers to understand what was involved,
who was involved, um, w- how we could rely on this.
We had then worked together across a number of
cross-agencies. So I think it was at 9:00 AM the next morning we had the
first cross-agency meeting, um, that we conducted which was where we brought
together everyone in that response, whether it was WorkSafe, education,
health, ourselves, um, involved in that, um,
and then worked through which products were affected, what was the
public health response, both from a PCBU perspective
and as a in-your-private-home perspective.
Also worked with our product safety team to ensure that our role,
obviously in the system, is making sure we're getting that awareness out, making
sure we ma- manage the recall notices and publish those.
Um, so we were ensuring that we had
our comms plan, the right messages that we could give, ensuring that we
were giving-
(sneezes)
... the best advice we could provide at the time, recognizing we are not the health
experts, nor are we the work and safety health experts either.
So bringing that together, um, was our role.
And then managing with those suppliers, um, the veracity of the testing,
making sure that we understood what was there, even to the point where I even saw
the visual representations from the tests. Um, but Ingrid, you could...
You have a very clear timeline that I know that we have worked on.
Ingrid led that response on behalf of MB.
Um, she is our acting deputy secretary for service delivery.
So Ingrid if you want to take some more or...
Ma- maybe if we could just focus on the timeline and then we'll look back to some
of the other st- questions.
Yeah.
Um, so... And thank you, Ingrid, for your work.
Um, just acknowledging how stressful it would have been-
Yeah.
... for many of the public servants who have worked through this.
(laughs)
Um, many of you will be parents yourselves of children-
Yeah. ... who have been affected by this, like me. My son was also...
Um, had a classroom that was shut down.
Um, and so it is stressful for the people who have to deal with that, with seven
and eight year olds who might put this stuff in their mouths-
Mm-hmm.
... and in their clothes. Um, how
does, uh, something like that happen where WorkSafe
can have, um, public notification on the 6th of November and then the
call to the, the CE of the organization responsible for
the system response for the government happens... ...
days later?
I don't think we can, we can answer that question on behalf of WorkSafe of
what, that time. We can work from the point where we knew.
Okay.
And we work forward. So I think that would have to be a question to the other
agency, I think.
O- Okay. Give us a sense then of what happens when WorkSafe have
had that information for a few days. How do you work back?
Yeah, so uh, perhaps if I just cover off, um, the
timeframe and I can go down to the hours from when MB, uh, first
received the information. So, um, the parts
that Suzanne mentioned happened within 30 hours.
So gathering the right agencies, the right people from those
agencies, engaging with the supplier who wasn't aware of
those tests, encouraging that supplier to,
uh, do a voluntary recall, est- establishing all the public information-
Mm-hmm.
... so that consumers or workplaces can take the right action or
with... And then the product, um......
uh, the recall notice being lodged by the supplier, all happened
within 30 hours. So, um, that is,
I think, agencies working across government at pace.
Within a further 20 hours, um, uh,
the public information was, uh, finalized,
published, a press release was out, MBIE i- issued, on its product
recall site, the product recall notice.
So over that period, um, a, a huge amount
of work was done, including late into the night because we
recognized that this is an important and worrying time
for, um, parents and for schools.
So, uh, as Suzanne mentioned, the questions prior
to w- when MBIE was informed, uh, for WorkSafe,
but at a high level, I can say that, um,
they were advised, uh, actually as a result
of a conversation on a podcast, uh, the
person on the podcast was, um, uh, in, uh, I
guess, uh, informed a WorkSafe person.
At that point, WorkSafe needed to carry out the validation and the due
deli- due diligence with its Australian counterparts to
understand the veracity of that information.
As you mentioned, there has been a bunch of disruption and worry for
parents, so it was really important that we got-
Hmm.
... to the truth within, um, those four days, uh,
which included, uh, the weekend as well.
And I know WorkSafe worked really-
Yeah.
... quickly with their Australian counterparts.
Mm-hmm. Agreement.
I think I also want to reiterate that, uh, and I think Ingrid mentioned, you're
right when it comes, uh, isn't just because it's children, but it always puts it
front of mind.
Hmm.
Um, I think there was no, there was, uh, no stone
unturned on MBIE's part.
Yeah.
Um, the team did work long into the night.
We also contacted our,
um, colleagues over in Australia because obviously
that, there was an Australian angle to this as well.
Um, and so we were actually ahead of them by five
hours of coming out. Um,
so, um, having been in Australia last week, I did make a point about that to them,
um, that, "We may have moved faster in New Zealand." Um, and I think that just
shows you that
the focus that was put on this, um-
Yeah.
... MBIE, the, one of the benefits that you do have when MBIE's working in these
sort of areas is, yes, we're an organization at scale, but
in these situations, we can bring the skill to bear.
And so, although the product safety team is a relatively small team,
s- uh, the entire MBIE wrapped around it.
So we've com- we absolutely, you know, supported that team
through adding resources and everything else to it to make sure this was dealt with
in what we thought was the fastest, but
most best response we could do.
Yeah. Agreement.
Um, just on the, on the timeline point and then perhaps we can come back to
what you've said about the, the team-
Hmm.
... and the resource around that 'cause I am interested in that.
Um... are we,
are we saying that it's, that it's good enough or as good as it gets?
Are there changes that you anticipate MBIE and WorkSafe working
through to avoid that delay between the
agencies? Um, because I think from the end user's
perspective, parents who can see that there was a six-day delay in them
getting the information when others were getting more proactive
information wouldn't be what most New Zealanders would expect.
I think you c- um, you can always say that once we've got a little bit
further into this, w- we will always go back and look at what could we have done
differently? What can we learn from this?
What process do we put in place that enable us to not be
either reliant on individuals or reliant on individual systems, but allow the
system to work in a more coordinated fashion?
So that is something that the team will do once we just get out of this
initial phase, um, to go back and look at where we
are, recognizing that it was in a
fast-changing environment where we were dealing with changes,
um, to the products, to the suppliers, to the testing over a
series of hours. So yeah, but it is something we will always look at about
what can we do better?
Okay.
You're still for the-
Oh.
... processing.
Oh, you-
Okay. I do have a different set of questions around-
Oh. Oh, that's good.
Yeah.
I'll go to Scott Willis. Thank you.
Um, I'm very aware that, uh, MBIE
runs the compliance for the Healthy Homes
standards.
Mm-hmm.
And if we're thinking about, um, people and safe and
productive work, part of that is ensuring that people have
somewhere healthy to live.
I'm trying to understand how, how effective that is, and
particularly from someone who comes from the Deep South.
I understand there's only two people who do compliance in the Deep South.
I wonder if you've got any information on how well that's going,
what number of prosecutions you're doing,
and, and any other plans you have to really expand
compliance to make sure that we have
homes that are achieving the Healthy Homes standard.
Ingrid's team-
Scott, can I, um, sorry to interrupt you guys.
Uh, Scott, uh, the building and tenancy system is in the next
part, but I can see that you've tried to link it to employment.
Mm-hmm.
So (laughs) I'll let this one go, just focusing on employment because
otherwise other members, those who might have questions in that part might miss out
that line. Yeah.
Okay. Um, we'll just give an overview then-
Yeah.
... and maybe come back and give the detail.
Um, but in terms of, uh, Healthy Homes compliance,
Ingrid's team, the Tenancy Compliance and Investigations
Team, uh, are a national team.So yes, there may be
a limited number of people who are physically located down in the Dunedin
office, but what we did when we ran the recent operation, uh,
where we were looking at particularly student accommodation earlier in the year
and, and compliance with Healthy Homes, we then bring more of the team from across
the country to focus on that area. So yes, they're a national
team, but locally distributed, and then we bring them together.
But Ingrid, you might wanna talk about, a little bit about the c- 'cause we've,
you've got a lot of data, I know, on this, so.
I do. Um, yeah, thanks for the question.
So, uh, as you'll be aware, from the 1st of July that
all of the Healthy Homes standards are now applicable to all
landlords. Uh, we work in partnership with the Ministry
of Housing and Urban Development, who are the policy lead, we're the
operational arm. Uh, and just prior to that,
um, deadline, HUD ran a
survey which, um, showed that 90%, uh,
or landlord... 90% of landlords w- were either
compliant or will be compliant by that 1 July
deadline. Um, that, that shows,
I think, that there's high awareness, there's high willingness amongst
landlords to meet those Healthy Homes, uh, standards.
Uh, but our compliance team are always available
to, uh, respond to complaints from
renters, but we also run a proactive program of
compliance to make... We use, um, all forms of
ki- of data to, uh, to identify where we should
put our proactive resources. So for example, we use
the bond data, we use health data
basically because, you know, we're trying to achieve some health outcomes as well
through these standards. We use data from councils,
uh, we use data from our other regulatory partners to make sure that our
proactive efforts are going in the right place.
Um, in terms of the Deep South,
we have done a recent, relatively recent large
operation because, uh... Focused mainly on, uh,
students in the Dunedin region. Uh, so we brought in
some of our compliance team from across the country for that.
We visited 53, um, uh, rental
ho- uh, homes lived in by students, and we ran,
uh, that program all the way from engaging with the
community first, engaging with the council and with the, um,
university d- there and doing (?) ,
all the way through to, um, hard outcomes, actual
tangible results. So the compliance, um,
has... Uh, that compliance operation has produced
extra, um, heat pumps in rental
homes, it's produced completely renovated
bathrooms, uh, to meet those standards.
Uh, it's produced other, um, more minor fixes
to actual physical rental, uh, properties.
Um, but we also have ha- held landlords to account through that
process as well. So we've done warnings, uh, and we've done
infringements. So, uh, I hope that gives a c- a
spread of our commitment to making sure that homes,
uh, Healthy Ho- Healthy Home standards compliant,
and that we will use proactive work to make sure that people are
getting (?)
I think the other thing we use to support that is, um,
our use of communications and stories in the media.
So to raise awareness to those, uh, landlords who may not
be as compliant as they should be that we are there, and that
we are working, and to ensure that everyone is.
And I do believe at one point in this, the Dunedin student magazine, its
name escapes me even, The Critic. Um, although my son tells me
regularly what it is. Um, that, uh, the quote was,
"MBIE's on the war path." Maybe not the language I would like to have
used, but it was a definite signal to the market that we were taking this
seriously and we take our obligations seriously in this space.
So, uh, they definitely knew we were coming.
Yeah.
All right, so you saved the supplementaries for this for the next part.
Um, so you want to finish that response? I'll let you finish
that. I would o-... C-... If I may, I'd just add that, um,
awareness and making sure that landlords and renters are
aware of tenancy services compliance, um,
uh, team is really important to us.
So we do use, uh, proactive press releases as a way to
show that we are making a difference.
We do that regularly after, um, large operations or after
successful to- uh, tribunal cases.
And we do have a range of successful cases where we have,
um, achieved, uh, monetary awards that we then,
uh, pass back to the tenants once we've been able to,
um, uh, get it from the landlords. So
yeah, it's a full, full suite of, um, regulatory interventions.
Yep, all right. Thank you.
Thank you, madam,
So can I, can I ask you all to look at the part we are at?
We are at part four, and if you look at the points under part four, and if you
can bring your questions to that.
Thank you, madam chair. I've got a supplementary-
So building intensity systems, this is next, next part.
... that relates to part four.
Next part.
I've got a supplementary-
But your primary w-... Became more like a part five, as I said in the
start. Again, i- it's... So I'm going to go to primary, Doctor
Venisa Vinay.
Thank you very much, madam chair. Um, in regard to, um, wor-
um, WorkSafe place t- um, safety, and, um, your
interactions with WorkSafe on another...
Actually not related to the asbestos but, um, to engineered
stone. Um, just wondering if we can have a bit more of
insight into the advice that's been sought and, um, the
breadth of that, um, and where you're up to in terms of, um,
creating... Uh, you know, giving information for the, the minister to make a
decision on.
So we, we, um, ran a consultation towards this
end of last year and early this year.
Um, we've been looking at that alongside the minister's other priorities for the
course of this year. We've just very recently put that advice up to the minister
about what we should do next. Um, we're in the middle of a conversation with her,
so we'll have... Uh, I think once the minister's made some decisions-
... there, there'll be some public information about what happens next.
Okay. And, uh, can I just... One quick thing?
Yeah.
Um, has the, um, the Occupational
Physicians Association, has that been...
Have they been consulted regarding this?
Uh, I'll at least double-check, but I can come back to the committee about that.
Thank you.
I'll ask a question on migrant exploitation.
So, I note that the reporting, uh, has decreased.
Mm-hmm.
So, can you just elaborate on that?
Um, um, in, in your report, you know, it says it's decreased,
like, uh, wha- what is it that, that, uh, has
resulted in that, and, uh, what is being done to kind of
minimize it further?
Mm.
So, I'm hopeful it's because there's less migrant exploitation.
Yeah, of course.
(laughs)
Of course. But, but, but, it's, it just happened.
Like, are you claiming that it just happened, uh, or-
No,
no. ... were there some mechanisms put in place that resulted in that?
So, I'm just keen to understand-
Yeah.
... what worked there, and, uh, what is the plan to ensure that
that kind of momentum keeps going?
Yeah.
Yeah. Apologies, I wasn't trying to be flippant.
(laughs)
No, that's fine.
I just, I, I just-
We genuinely
hope, yeah. ... genuinely hope that there's less migrant exploitation.
We saw a real pi- a real kind of spike in migrant exploitation visa
applications after we extended the length of them
and the, um, ability to claim, um, off them, a,
a longer-term visa. And there has been a decrease since we reduced
that. Um, there's also been a number of things we've done to wrap around
with migrant communities. Um, a lot of work, um, e-
education. Um, we now know lots more about employers.
We're now three years into the Accredited Employer Work Scheme.
Mm-hmm.
And so, where we find, um, incidents of migrant exploitation,
those, those, um, employers are no longer able to employ
migrants. So, there's a combination of things, I think, that have led to that
position.
Good. And from a policy perspective, I think there were a couple of changes, um,
that were made to tighten up the settings.
Mm-hmm.
So, things like, um, uh, English language, uh, minimum
English, English language skills, um, the skills and experience thresholds.
These were, these were tightened up as part of the, the AEWV, the, the, uh,
Approved-
Mm-hmm. ... Employer, um, Work Visa, and I think they also supported -
Yeah.
- ... tightening things.
Yeah, no, very pleased to hear that because I think it was a year ago when you
commented that you were working on that-
Yeah.
... tightening the AEWV and, um-
Yes. Yes. ... where we were hearing lots of media stories as well-
Yeah.
... and of course, stories and, uh, stories from various community members about,
uh-
Mm-hmm.
... e- exploitation that was happening at so many different levels.
Um, so with the, um, the, uh, the premium
for job offers, how big is that issue?
Do you hear that often? Uh...
Uh, we, we hear that all of the time internationally.
Um, we have a really credible immigration licensed, um,
industry onshore, but offshore, we struggle, um-
Yeah.
... along with every other partner in the world.
I mean, there's been more and more, um, um,
a displacement of people and, and sadly, exploitation of them.
So, we've got a very big awareness campaign where we've linked up with all of the
Migration Five partners that we work with. So, internationally, we have a campaign.
It was, um, a, a anti-, um, Fraud Awareness
Week a couple of weeks ago, and we launched a, a campaign b- between the
five of us. I think we've pretty much covered the globe, um, on social
media platforms, um, and everywhere that we can through, um, NGO
agencies to, to, to ask people not...
(laughs) If it, if it looks like it's a good deal and you're paying more than-
Mm-hmm.
... the visa price, it won't be. So, um, I think the industry-
(clears throat)
... itself has done a, a lot of good work.
Mm-hmm.
And within the, um, service delivery, uh, compliance
teams, um, there have been a number of really successful prosecutions, and
I think publicizing those has made a difference.
Yeah. And, uh, given, uh, it can be...
I mean, if there is a complaint, it can be tracked if it happens here, but if it
happens overseas-
Yeah.
... uh, it is kind of difficult.
Yes.
Uh, are you getting more complaints of, uh, transactions happening overseas
because... In, in a
trying to kind of, um, hide from the system?
Yeah. I, I think we're actually seeing less that actually
result in coming onshore, um-
Mm-hmm.
... because of the work that we've been doing.
Yeah.
Um, but also, I, I think, um,
we've got a really, really good employer base-
Mm-hmm.
... in New Zealand, and one of the benefits of the Accredited Employer Work Scheme
is we know who they are. Um, we work across all of the settings.
Um, the Labor Inspectorate work hand-in-hand with, um, the immigration
compliance people. Um, and we genuinely think
that, that, that we have employers who, who try to avoid doing the wrong
thing and always try and do the right thing.
So, less use of offshore agents. We've been asking people to, if they need
to use an immigration advisor, we encourage them to use a New Zealand licensed
immigration advisor.
Yeah. So, what systems, uh, are being put in place if there is a complaint about
a transaction that happened overseas?
Mm. So, we don't have a jurisdiction overseas.
What I do have is a network of, um, immigration staff
offshore who are able to kind of find and disrupt these
offshore. So, we have a network of, um, liaison officers,
uh, whoops, predominantly, um,
looking at trafficking and serious offenses, but also, wherever they pick up
information, they do what they can to shut it down.
We've had really successful work offshore with, um, a, a, a
prosecution in Thailand last year where we were able to disrupt,
um, and the Thai authorities were able to prosecute, but we don't have a
jurisdiction offshore.
I think one of the other things that A- Alison's team is really good at is
monitoring, um,
social media offshore, where, and actually been coming back to us and
telling us, "We need to start advertising in these areas to, to
counter where, you know, those bad actors are, are
trying to gather people from." So, I think they do a grand job of kind of trying
to deal with that disinformation.
Mm-hmm. Sure. ? and to you then.
Um, the question of how we're responding to migrant exploitation
is, um, really critical, and, um, just wanting to
understand whether you have put resourcing to respond to
employers raising issues about other employers within their, their sector that
they're seeing, um, engaging in practices which,
you know, things like payments made-
... that aren't compliant with the rules.
Mm-hmm.
Um, feedback that I have as a comments spokesperson is that when those issues
are raised, it is, it is difficult for employers to be able to raise them with
MB and that there are delays in, in, um, acting on the
information. Is there adequate resourcing in the system?
Has the resourcing changed over the last few years?
So, the resourcing hasn't changed.
Um, we still have the same labor inspectors and even maybe slightly
more, um, immigration compliance
officers. We're always... We've been working closely with industry as
part of our, what we are calling our Integrated Regulatory Program, which is how do
we ensure that the Labor Inspectorate, um, the
immigration compliance teams and the other various compliance teams with MB join up
better, so that when we do receive information from industry
or from employers saying, "We've got an issue here," um, regardless of
which team it comes into, it'll go to the right team and we respond.
So, that's one of the things is, again, is around this data flow that we're trying
to do.
So, there's no wrong door-
Thank you.
... in coming to MB. Um, we, we did bring industry
in to talk to us, and that was one of the things they did here.
How do you make it easier? So, we took that on board and that's where we're...
we've put processes in place behind the scenes so that regardless if it
comes into our Labor Inspectorate, it comes into an immigration officer, it comes
into our company's office compliance team, it doesn't matter.
We'll deal with it. We also have to look at it from a, an angle
that if someone is... you know, if there's a organization that's a bad organization
that's exploiting migrants, then that's likely not to be the only thing they're
doing. So, um, we'll have a look at them in the round.
Quick supplement. Yeah. Um, just wondering whether, um, the work that
has progressed since, um, two... the 2021 downgrade for
New Zealand in our rankings, um-
Mm-hmm.
... globally for trafficking-
Um, that is something I followed along with.
Is that still continuing in this...
um, are we improving-
Yeah.
... New Zealand's, um, international reputation by responding to those
issues which see people brought to New Zealand to work in-
Yeah.
... which we wouldn't expect here?
Yeah, we ha- uh, we've been doing a lot of work.
Um, the trafficking team, I've put more resource into it.
So, Fiona, who manages the-
Wonderful.
... trafficking team can tell you, um, what we're planning to do and wh- why
the downgrading was really, um, something we're looking at in terms
of... So, as Suzanne said, we look in the h- around, uh, the
whole of an employer and it's that kind of, um,
what, what's the easiest thing to get a prosecution on?
Um, and actually prosecuting on migrant exploitation is quite difficult.
(laughs)
It takes a long time to get through the court.
So, actually, we'll be taking action on an employer, um, taking away their
accreditation, but you mightn't actually see the headline as, um, a, as a
trafficking headline. But I'll pass to Fiona to tell you what we're doing at the
moment.
I- Just to give Fiona a couple of minutes.
Is that approach of we will take the
fastest and most
appropriate action that will enable us to take...
to d- disrupt the market and take that person out?
So, it might not always be, as you say-
Mm-hmm. ... a trafficking case. It could take years before the courts.
We may find other ways that enable us to remove them from the market faster that
you wouldn't see as a trafficking headline, but we've absolutely taken someone out
of the market who was doing harm.
Right. Yeah.
It's just about being expeditious about what's the, the best way.
Thank you.
Mm-hmm.
I mean, we would absolutely agree that it's a really serious organized
crime and there is always work underway into what
we can do in the space, and there's actually been a few things going on as we speak
at the moment, and particularly, um, some legislative updates to the Crimes Act
that are underway at the moment. Um, there's a whole lot of intelligence-led
activities and there's a work... some work going on about what's gonna happen
post-2025 with the, um, trafficking, uh, plan of
action.
Mm-hmm.
So, it is something that's taken really seriously and that we
do, um, focus a lot on it, both offshore and onshore.
As Alison talked about, we have our network of offshore-
Mm-hmm.
... um, immigration and migration liaison offices that work with their offshore
counterparts as well. So, there is a lot of work happening in, in
this space.
Okay. A new primary from Ricardo and then
Yeah.
Thank you very much. I just have primary and a couple of supplementary on,
uh, compliance.
Mm-hmm.
And looking at your deportation numbers, um, from the year we're
reviewing, they seem to have gone up and it's at the highest level in about five
years.
Mm-hmm.
Um, how many minors are currently liable for
deportation?
Kate?
It's, it's a difficult question to answer because there are a number who are in the
education system who are born here and who, who have unlawful
status. Um, the, the number of minors who are currently
liable for deportation
is, uh... I'd have to get back to you on that number.
Yeah, yeah. So-
That's fine.
... just to follow up.
That's okay, I can follow later.
Just your number I had, sorry. (laughs)
Yeah.
That's okay. Out of the 440 people that you deported over the year that
we're reviewing, how many of them were
underage?
Uh, again, I'd have to get back to you on that, on that number.
But they, there were... I can... what I can say is that there were no minors
deported who were not accompanied by their parents.
Okay.
Um, yeah.
So, um, following up on that then, that's useful to know because,
um, you may have seen there was a new story on The Press in relationship to,
um, to parents that have residency-
Mm-hmm.
... um, and, and their child who is liable for deportation has been told to, to
make arrangements. So, if you're telling me just now that there hasn't been
deportations
for minors that haven't been accompanied with the parents, in a
situation like that, would you go forward and
deport a minor if the parents... if this minor's parents are
residents, um, well knowing that if you deport the minors,
they... the minor will definitely not be accompanied by the parents?
No, we wouldn't do that. No. Um, we, we, we... it's not...
it would not be lawful to, to take a minor from their parents and
deport them. We just simply wouldn't do it. Um, so that we...
the, the way that we would deal with that would be, uh, that the...
we cannot change the fact that the mi- that the minor is still in- ineligible for a
visa and therefore liable for deportation, so we would-Uh, we would
actively work with the parents, um, to
a-a... to, to, for the best outcome for, for, um,
the child, which could be that the parents decide that if their child is no longer
able to remain in New Zealand, um, a-a-an, and
lawfully, that, that prohibits the child from, from accessing some
services. So, the parents may decide that it's, that this thing is to,
uh, leave while, even though they have residence.
Um, but it's about, it's about working a, it's a long process,
but it's a case, uh, it's a fair and a just case management process that we go
through.
If I may just seek one more clar- one more question of clarity.
So, can you please guarantee to me then that you haven't,
and do not intend to, deport minors who
are unaccompanied by parents? And the reason why I ask this is because
of the recent policy changes, um, particularly for young people who may
have intellectual disabilities.
And we are seeing a n- a growing number of young people who are being denied visas
but the parents are being granted visas.
So, can you clarify for us that your intention will remain that you will not
take action to deport minors unaccompanied by parents?
Yes, I can.
So, the five-year-old, uh, we would not put a five-year-old on a plane to another
country without their parents.
Thank you very much.
I'll just mention though, um, it is a case-by-case basis and there are a
number of cases where, um, a child has not been entered on a residency
application in full knowledge that that residency wouldn't be given.
Um, and so it is a requirement to put all of your children onto the
application. We will, we'll consider every case individually, um,
and I, I won't talk about individual cases, but I, I can't, can't blank
say we wouldn't, we wouldn't take a different action if we found that the
parents had, um, deliberately, um, tried
to circumvent the process.
That-
So, it's the, um-
It doesn't mean we take the child without the parents.
Yeah, just 'cause-
(laughs)
There seems to be slightly co- conflicting answers here.
No, no, no. That's ͞I'm saying right now-
I think, I think what I'm trying to say, sorry, just to be clear, is there will be
c- there will be circumstances possibly where we, uh, we
revoke the visa-
Yeah.
... because the parent's-
That's different.
... misrepresentation
in their family. Right. Have you done that in the, have you done that in the past financial year?
No.
Yeah.
Okay.
So, so just clarifying that if that is the situation that parent's visa
can be revoked as well because that was based on false information provided to the
system.
Yes, yes. And that changes the way we would do it.
Yes, that changes the situation.
If the child had some kind of disability, they knew their application is not going
to go through so they don't put the child on the application.
Yeah. Mm-hmm.
Get the residency and then bring the child in so now the
child They bring the child in then.
Yeah,
And we, we have cases of that, yeah.
Yeah, yeah. Thank you. Uh, uh, there was a private, yeah, um, yeah, Honorable Jenny
Anderson.
Um, thank you very much. I just had a question around,
um, uh, so we're on labor, we're on workforce something, so I'm good on that.
Yeah, yep.
Just checking I'm under the right (laughs)
(laughs)
... before I ask my question. Uh, uh, the, the government's just established
the, um, Workforce Development Councils and established the new industry
skills boards. Um, uh,
m-many of those WDCs did enjoy the support of the sector and,
and many in the sector have voiced concerns about the
disestablishment. Have, what have you been hearing from the
sector on the new ISBs?
So these are primarily with, um, the Tertiary Education Commissions-
Yeah.
They're in the Ministry of Education, so they're not, they're not funded through
us. Um, you know, obviously we work, uh, with them and we
do, uh, work on workforce planning where we, uh, have, you know, we interact with
those. Um, they're, they're in the very early set up phases, I think it would be
fair to say. Um-
That's, that's a bit of a stretch to relate to our, um-
Um, okay. Another one then.
Yeah.
Is there any part of MB that will be picking up the work from the
WDCs that will not be performed by, by the new
boards?
There, there are no functions that have transferred to us.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
Right. Don't-
I mean, I might just say that, um, one of the things that we are
exploring is this, um,
kind of d- a data infrastructure that those WDCs
have, um, have built up over time.
Yeah.
And so, you know, we are interested in our role of, you know,
monitors of the labor market and understanding what's coming on to ensure that
that information continues to become available.
So, we're sort of, because it's such early stages and they're just finding their
feet and they're actually in the midst of recruitment, we're sort of, you know,
really closely working just to make sure that, you know, some of those things, you
know-
Mm-hmm.
... continue to, uh, to be available to us, so...
Um, you, you obviously engage with those, some of those key sectors and
have relationships in there.
There has been some quite strong concerns about how, um,
regional skills development and how they train, they interface between
work, work skills and demand for
work and the flow of workers. Do you, do you
sort of, what do, what do you do with that feedback?
Do you just sort of, does it feed back into the system in any way?
Like, you, I mean, we, we hear very loud, particularly from construction, that
there's been significant problems in that sector
and, and there's alarm bells ringing in terms of,
um, lost jobs and, and concern for future
pipeline. Uh, do you take that into account at all or you just say that's
TC, it's not us, kind of?
No, no, look,
if I-
(laughs)
If I zoom out, um, first, the sort of skills mismatch in the labor
market is one of the, again, one of the features of New Zealand's, um, economy-
Mm-hmm.
... that is a, that is an ongoing concern to us.
And so, um, that does come down to how well does workforce,
um, planning work, uh, how well does the, um, the school system
respond to industry. Um, and there are different...
So we're interested, from an overall labor market point of view, about what are
some of those mechanisms to encourage, uh, that.
Um, one of the pieces of work that, uh, we've done over the past year, which Shania
might want to talk more about, is, um, having a look at the construction sector
actually and-... the, the, the mechanisms in place to try and
help the pipeline.
Mm-hmm.
Um, I think one of the big features in that sector that has been, um, a positive
development is the Infrastructure Commission, how they are trying to get a much
stronger pipeline of work. Um, and then d- how do we then
translate that into on the ground in a region?
Um, and that's where particularly the role of the MSD regional commissioner
becomes important and the, the others in the, in the local labour market to be
able to try and say, "Well, here is the pipeline that we think is coming through,
the projects perhaps from Robert's area that are coming online and how do we match
that up with local labor demand?"
Yeah. Mm-hmm.
So, there's definitely a lot of active work that is very much across agencies.
But Sione, is there anything you want to add?
There's probably nothing else. I think just that, that, that collective
agencies, you know, us with MSD, MOE, T-
TAC, uh, TEC, just to join together and, um,
yeah, my bad advice. Um, do, do you think there's, there's
more that we... Or how should I word that?
Um, I mean, one fair criticism could be of New Zealand
that we have a real lack of workforce planning, that it is a stop/start,
um, of, you know, things are going great, e- e- and then it sort of
stops. But we're not thinking now enough about the types of jobs
we'll be needing in five or 10 years and how we are training and
incentivizing investment in those areas. Mm-hmm.
Do, do you have a view of how we could strengthen our future workforce
planning as a, as a, as a country
to be more productive?
So, I think I'd agree with your overall articulation.
I think a lot of the, um,
there are a, a number of other, um, economies around the world that do have a much
more structured, um, system in place. Um, the...
So this is where I, I think it is an ongoing area of focus, is to we'll ask how
could we strengthen some of those mechanisms?
I've mentioned the construction, um, that, uh, that we've worked on.
There are some place-based-
(coughs)
... um, developments as well. Our sector workforce employment program team worked
in the Franklin district to try and look at what's the pipeline of work coming
there and work with local stakeholders to try and join those things up.
So there are, you know, a number of initiatives that, uh, we try and do to,
to, to bolster that. But I think it's an ongoing, um-
... question as to how can we strengthen those mechanisms.
Yeah. Yeah. Do you factor in at all, um, or how much do you factor in at all
development such as AI in terms of the impact on that and
workforce planning and, and the types of jobs we're likely to see disappear and
appear? Do, do you do work in that f- that area?
Uh, y- yes, we do. Uh, we... Now, AI is obviously a, an emerging (laughs) you
know, uh, area. So that, um, in the first instance, we're looking at, um, trying to
monitor the impact in the labor market.
So under s- trying to understand are we seeing any changes in the, in the different
skill levels that are being, uh, offered, for example. Um, you know, this is...
The big question here is, um, in the past, technology,
uh, transitions, the labor market has adjusted.
Um, and the question is, is this time different or not?
And, um, uh, and the... I'm probably more on the,
um, on the optimistic side that the labor market will adjust, but, um, there will
be a, uh, a skills and training piece around how some of the...
while it might not be full jobs, it might be tasks within jobs that change.
And so, that's the sort of thing that we're going to try and monitor, um, through
our labor market work.
Do you think there's a role for government in enabling businesses, New Zealand's
predominantly small business, to adapt to s- changes
such as AI?
Um, uh, yes. There are a number of elements that government can
do to assist and there are some, um, programs
that, uh, the government is looking at around small business to e-
encourage uptake and adoption of AI. Um, I'm...
I do c- worry that, uh, that our businesses won't be (laughs) , um,
adopting, uh, AI given that it's such a transformative technology and we don't want
to be left behind as, as an economy. And so, the economy... uh, the, um...
So there are some ex- existing programs that I believe the minister for small
businesses is having a look into.
Yeah.
Definitely in the space of the regional business partner network.
Right.
That is a real key focus for them and we've done some real work in the AI space in
there for business.
Yeah.
Um, so we can always provide some extra inspiration.
Sorry, Ruben, I'm stealing your question.
No, no, it's, uh...
You have a supplementary, Ruben Davidson?
Yes. Can I just... Yeah, Ruben, what's that?
Oh, no, hold on. Ruben Davidson-
Can I just
... you have a supplementary.
Oh, you can have... You can go on.
No. You don't have a supplementary?
I do have a sup-
Okay. You, you ask your question.
(laughs) Sure thing, Pam D.
I've given you like a really, really good freerun.
I haven't even asked why the government lost 3,000 jobs in construction.
I've been really nice today.
So, so, um, the member next to me has started down a line of sups that,
that I was interested to explore in the AI space.
Um,
I guess one of the other... You've said that, that the government
has done some work in this or is, you know, prioritizing some work in this space
and that you are. Do you think the, the current
strategy is, um, fit for
purpose?
Uh, I'm not sure that's something that, uh, that, uh, is my place to, to, to
comment on. Um, the... yeah, I mean, the, the
judgments around whether the government strategy is correct, I think I'll leave to,
to other commentators.
Yeah. So I think, uh, this... The, the annual review is about their performance,
annual performance, their current operations and strategic intentions.
They can't give opinion on what government is going to do with them.
Sure. So, so, um, I guess one of
the, one of the positive impacts of AI is increased
productivity. Which
industries or sectors do you think we're likely to see the immediate
and then the nearer term
lifts in productivity in?
I mean, I, I think this is something that's still emerging all around the world,
right?
So it's... it is quite speculative at the moment. There's certainly...
um, when you look globally, uh, in the ICT area, that's
already... you're already seeing, um, you know, coding (laughs) as being-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, accelerated through the use of, uh, AI tools, but i- it is
very much early days. Uh, it does seem to be in some of these more
knowledge-intensive workforces, like you could certainly see, um, parts of the
legal, legal professions, um, uh, research and so
on being able to be replaced. We're obviously looking at trialing it in
policy-making. You know, how can we, um, do some of the tasks in, in,
uh, public policy and, and augmenting what we do with, um, AI?
So I think it's very early days.
Yeah.
Are you, are you doing anything in the-
... or, um, promotion supporting anything in the health and safety
space, 'cause there's huge potential for,
um, really proactive health and safety-
Mm.
... uh, you know, advances, uh, with use of AI.
So, the, um... I know that WorkSafe themselves, uh, have been trialing, uh,
use of AI to development some of their guidelines, um, and, and
rules. Uh, so they are actively pursuing it like, like others as well,
as to how can it, um, accelerate, um, the work that they're doing.
They've got a lot of guidance and rules that they need to, to create.
So if they can accelerate that, then great.
Uh, actually-
This is-
... just to tip into how that would help, even in MBIE's
internal use of AI, I think Richard mentioned at the very start (laughs)
this morning, uh, we're using AI across our service centers.
And that allows us, um, to analyze the purpose of people's calls to
us, whether or not we're getting the messages out as clearly as we can to support
businesses, or support consumers, or to support employees and employers.
And that enables us to tailor not only what we provide in terms
of hard information, but also how we put information on our websites, how our
compliance teams talk to customers.
So, there's a whole heap of uses for AI that
aren't necessarily obvious, but actually will help us
strengthen consumers and, and employers' understanding of their rights and their
responsibilities, and actually help lift productivity in the market.
And, and I might add one thing-
(laughs) ... just in terms of the monitoring work that, um, Nick was talking about, in terms
of, of what we're doing in understanding the pattern.
One of the kind of deep dive areas for us, um, will be
around looking at kind of what we call the AI exposed
industries. And I suppose you could think of that both positive and
negative. And we'll be taking, um, a methodology that's been
used quite successfully in Australia by Jobs and Skills Australia,
and just applying that here just to help kind of round out and create that picture
of, you know, what will the landscape look like, along with our kind of
regular monitoring, kind of understanding the trends and things. So...
Thank you.
Ricardo, you're private. Yeah.
Thank you so much. So over the period we're, we're reviewing, you would have been
preparing, uh, the paper that-
We're good on
time, yeah. ... you eventually published on the updated number of overstayers,
um, in the country.
Yeah.
Um, I've just got a few questions on that.
Mm-hmm.
First of all, what do you make of the fact that people from the United States
are the third-largest group of overstayers, ahead of people,
like, from countries-
Mm. Mm.
... like India?
Do you want to try this?
You can talk.
A- and what is the reason for that-
(laughs)
... do you think?
Most people will be surprised to know this.
Yeah. I, I won't-
It's, it's an interesting statistic and,
um, we... Uh, m- m- most
of this, the information we have is, is anecdotal, but I will, I will share
it, um, if that's okay. It's, uh, th- there's a high, high number of
visitors from the United States and what the overstayer, um, list,
or the unlawful list doesn't say, um, is how lo- how
long, or, uh, the, the... We, we can drill down into that.
But, um, it's at a point in time, and it may be the th- that
those visitors from the United States may have overstayed by two
weeks. Um, it may be that they are, um, on a working holiday
visa and they're just kind of making arrangements to go home or
they're, they're extending their, their tourist visa.
Um, so those are, those are the kind of the anecdotal reasons that we
understand.
Um, because if you overlay the immigration prio- th- the de- the deportation
priorities across that, they don't feature highly in the,
um, in the stats for criminality or, um, or
for, uh, health or for the other, th- the top three priorities for which
we would-
Mm.
... have activity.
And so, can I just confirm though that based on that data you produced around...
well, those estimates that you produced-
Mm-hmm. Yeah. ... around overstayer figures, um, you were not able to
identify, uh, for example, which countries were more
likely to have long-term overstayers, versus short-term overstayers?
And, and just confirming that, for example, the cases you're giving are simply
anecdotal and you currently don't hold information over the length of period?
We can, we can find that information.
Um, we just didn't publish it on that list, because that list is published at a, at
a da- uh, we do it once a year. We run th- run the data once a year,
um, and it is an estimate and its purpose is not-
Mm.
... uh, its purpose is for statistical analysis rather than to target
individual people on it.
Thank you. Um, so the minister at the time of the release of this
information announced that she would be preparing a new
bill to address some of the issues-
Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm. ... identified in those, in those statistics.
Where is the work, um, at in relationship to this bill?
Because the press release from the minister said that, um, the bill would be
introduced later in the year. The year's almost done.
Yeah.
Um, are we to expect... Is that bill ready, or?
It'll be early next year, I think, yeah.
It is. So we're in the drafting process at the moment.
And, um, how many advocates or, uh, imm-
or immigration lawyer, uh, groups have you engaged with as
part of this development to ensure that the w- the
s- that the wellbeing of, for example, minor overstayers-
Mm.
... are safeguarded as part of the development of this bill?
Um, I wouldn't have, uh, the exact number, so I can come back-
Yeah.
... to you with the makeup, but there's a few groups that, um, that, that we've
been working through. Um, we've been talking with, uh, a
focus group that's run out of Im- Immigration New Zealand-
Mm-hmm.
... that comprises of, uh, advisors, lawyers.
Um, there are groups that we have worked with directly in the
past.
Um, we're, we're currently working with, on an exposure draft with the-
Mm-hmm. ... Chief Victims Advisor, the Immigration Protection Tribunal, New Zealand
Law Society, and New Zealand Law Association.
So there are a number of those, those groups.
Mm.
And finally, so did you do... Have you done any sort of initiatives
around, um, getting out information on
compliance-
There
was one. ... of visas to ethnic communities? Uh, so you have.
Okay. Have you done that for Americans? Um, and I,
because-
It is
a good question. ... they're the, they're the third-largest group, right?
Above probably some of the groups that you're-
Yeah.
... targeting for that information.
Um, have you actually targeted American arrivals-
Mm-hmm. ... when it comes to information around compliance with immigration settings?
And if not, uh, do the information that you have now received
showing that they're the third-largest group show that maybe more work needs to be
done-
Mm.
... for arrivals from the US and the UK, which makes the sixth-largest
group?
Um-As part of, as part of the work we did when we released the figures,
uh, we engaged with the various, um, diplomatic representatives
in New Zealand and the, the United States of America were very, very interested
in, uh, in, in, you know, what we had to tell them.
And they asked us for a lot of information because they, they were wanting to put
out information to their, both to their diaspora here and, um,
through, through, um,
Mm-hmm.
... MFAT kind of channels. And so- so that we have done some work there.
And, um, of c- and part of that was linking them to the
significant, uh, information that is already available on the immigration-
Mm-hmm.
... website, um, that, and- and just pushing that out to- to- to all
of the communities that were represented actually.
So that was our, that was our-
Mm-hmm.
... approach was, "Did you know this?
And this is the information that we have that will assist your
communities."
All right.
Thank you.
... primarily from Arena Williams.
Thank you. Um, just coming back to, uh,
issues around product safety, um, I wanted
to ask about, um, and perhaps Ingrid can assist the committee with this, the
different sorts of guidance that are available through, um, lead- led
by MBIE, but available through MBIE, WorkSafe, Health Yeah. ...
Communication that (...) . Um, particularly
around, you know, if you think about the, um, Paul, he's a Christchurch
parent of a severely autistic son, um, who was dealing with four
different sets of information. The MBIE guidance, um, contained very
high level data that directed him to engage, um,
a professional product testing agency. He did that.
He spent thousands of dollars on that and was very lucky to find that, um,
very grateful to find that, um, there was no contamination in the products that
were all through his son's room. Um, but most parents can't afford that, let
alone the products that are-
Yeah.
... required to do, do a sort of home cleanup.
That's right.
Um, is the information that (...)
... by government suitable? And how do we improve, um, that different
sort of information which is getting out there from various different agencies when
MBIE is the lead?
I think... Oh, I don't know, Ingrid, if you wanted to jump in there.
You looked like you were-
How about I, um, start and, um, you've got stuff to add.
Uh, I- I think it's important firstly to understand that
we w- we are committed and were committed throughout the response to
provide, um, effective and
pragmatic and practical advice to, uh,
workplaces and to consumers like the, um, individual you
referenced. Um,
it's also helpful, I think, to understand the product safety
mandate. So- so we engage with suppliers
to encourage them and, uh, influence them to recall their
products and we, um, put that on our, uh,
website and we promote that through our channels.
We do have to rely on the regulatory expertise of other
agencies when it comes to how to safely,
uh, contain or clean up or dispose of goods.
And in the case of the, uh, send response,
WorkSafe was the agency that, uh, provided their
expertise on the advice for workplaces that included,
um, educational facilities as well and health with, uh,
experts in terms of providing advice to, uh,
consumers like the individual you referenced.
Um, MBIE's role is to facilitate and make s- make
sure that we're leading the response in gathering the right information from the
right regulatory agencies
and pushing that out to the consumers, uh, so that they're
aware of what they can do. There's, um,
always, uh, opportunities-
Mm-hmm.
... to reflect back on, um, responses such as this and
say, uh, how could we improve if this were to
happen again? And hopefully in a different, um, it won't happen again,
but, um, I hope you understand, you know, that reflection and
impro- uh, continuous improvement is always part of a response.
And so then there no doubt will be ways in which we reflect back
and say, "We could have done something differently." But I'm- I'm confident in the
e- the evolving state of the response, that we've
provided, uh, clear, accurate advice to all of
the, um, different cohorts that might have purchased, uh,
this sent product.
Madam Chair?
Absolutely.
Um, on the cleanup costs then, um, because I think there was helpful
advice from MBIE about what, you know, accessing those professional
services.
Um, one of the entities that was, um...
Well, the entities that were responsible for the cleanups locally were
councils. Um, how was MBIE then engaging with councils
so that they had the right information to make sure that people weren't dumping
this in their household waste?
Mm-hmm.
Um, I also have questions about the costs for public entities.
Obviously, councils are also public entities.
They had to meet that from their balance sheets. What about schools and daycares?
They're pretty, um,
you know, pressed for resources. And for principals who have to choose which way in
resourcing six months of a teacher aide versus the cleanup costs, you can
understand why there was a question of public safety about whether they could
actually even do that. Yep. Um,
yeah, thank you for the question and we've received a lot of inquiries about,
um, the costs. Uh, what I haven't mentioned throughout my
responses, and I think it's fairly critical here, is that suppliers are
responsible for the product. They need to make sure it
is safe and meets, um, lawful, uh,
criteria. So, um, and they have those obligations under
the Consumer Guarantees Act around, uh,
refunding or for, um, any reasonable,
uh, also unforeseeable costs resulting from a product
recall. Um, as to councils,
uh, throughout the early stages of the, um,
response, I think within the sort of 30 hours I
mentioned earlier, um, we engaged with Tai
Tuara, which are the, um, organization
that then can message out to the respective
councils.We engaged with them to make sure that they
were, uh, s- on standby once we'd developed
this public information to get it out to councils so that
councils weren't caught by surprise that they were likely to have
inquiries, um, and that they understood what the advice
was for them as a workplace, uh, to
adequately dispose of this material.
Um, and it was appropriate that that, um, that
councils were taking that role as part of the response.
Um, you mentioned, uh, schools and, um, other
educational facilities like E- ECEs.
Um, th- they're a business and so the WorkSafe advice
was relevant to them. Um,
I can't speak on behalf of the Ministry of Education as to what they're doing
to support, uh, principals but they are absolutely part
of the agency response and I know they are,
um, thinking about what options they have, uh,
and engaging with, um, ministers as all agencies
are.
All right.
Final supplementary on this? Yeah.
Mm. Okay. We might come back to then the prosecutions which you've mentioned.
Um, then I'll ask you about the council responses.
How are the 1.6 million Aucklanders included in that response when
Auckland is a member of Te Tira. You know, they're also reliant on MBIE to
make sure there is disposals and it was one of the slowest parts of the responses,
was making sure that Aucklanders could dispose of it safely.
Um, yeah. In the early days, um, we did get
questions from Auckland Council and their model,
as I understand it, and, and, um, if I'm wrong I'll c- come
back to the committee but as I understand it, they ha- um, had a
outsourced model for dealing with asbestos
disposal, uh, and they've
subsequently, um, adjusted and we, uh, based on some
advice that we gave to them and through Te Tira.
Um, and my understanding is that there is now a appropriate
process, um, for disposal for, for Aucklanders.
Um, having said that, uh, you know,
we've received questions through our, um,
our call center on numerous things.
Um, and I haven't seen that that's been a particular
line of questioning from consumers, so, uh, if there
is that lack of understanding out there, we'd be, um, happy
to help people and we would do that through, um, either our
public channels or communicating with individuals if you're
aware of any.
I do have some questions on
Yeah. You, you, I think you want to change the topic but within the same...
Yeah, that's fine. Yeah. It's, just don't repeat the stuff. Yeah.
And, um, in terms of, uh, what happens now
for those sellers and importers, um, can I ask you about
how, you know, these retailers that have stopped the affected Kinetic Sand
products, um, you've, you've notified them, um, there have been
recalls but what next? Um, will product safety
regulations change? Will there be enforcement actions taken by
MBIE?
Uh-
Just-
... so I'll pass to my colleague, Andy, on that latter point, but if I can just
say that, um, one of the parts of, like, we've been
fully focused on the response in addressing the products that
are out there and removing them from supply and making sure
consumers are aware of which products they, um, need to
pay attention to. So s- we've now done eight
recalls. I think one went out this morning as well.
So that's based on having a proactive testing
regime so that we can really make sure that we're capturing the full
scope of the problem and then, again, engaging with suppliers so that
they're making these voluntary recalls.
So our focus has been on that response piece.
The enforcement piece, um, and reli- and other
agencies using their enforcement powers, that's a secondary bit.
Our full focus has been on the response and making sure all consumers
and businesses are aware of what to do.
But may- maybe Andy can talk about policy side a second.
Yeah, so, um, my name is Andrew Hulme.
I'm the GM for Commerce, Consumer and Business, so look after, um,
uh, consumer policy including product safety.
Um, but, so, so, um, in terms of, I guess, product safety policy and
the, and the regulatory frameworks, the way that we sort of approach this to begin
with was to look at, uh, what does the existing regulatory
regime require? And of course what we've discovered is that these products
are sort of comprehensively banned in New Zealand under a range of
different pieces of legislation, so there is an import prohibition,
uh, for these products that, that is, that is in place.
So it is illegal to import these products, uh, and of course it's illegal
to, to handle these products without, um, with- without a license as
well. So, uh, what- what's clear is that these products
are comprehensively banned in, in the New Zealand, uh, in,
in, in New Zealand already. Um, and so it is
suppliers' responsibility to, uh, to ensure that the products
that they, uh, sell to consumers are safe and fit for
purpose. Um, and so our product safety system is
designed around ensuring that suppliers are taking, uh, action that they
need to in order to, uh, ensure that products that they sell
are safe and, and where they've d- where it's been,
um, found that perhaps a product has a defect or, or is unsafe for
whatever reason that they take specific action that,
um, uh, through i- through, um, voluntary recalls.
So that's, that's what the process they've been working through to date.
Um, and what we've found is that suppliers, to, to date, have been
cooperative in removing those products that, uh, that they see as, you
know, that we've found as, as unsafe.
A- including the cost. Cost goes on the supplier.
Correct. That's right.
So that was part of your question, yeah.
So definitely, um-
Yeah.
... under the Consumer Guarantees Act, consumers...
That, that's actually the piece of legislation that allows-
Yeah. Just wanted to clarify.
... for redress but happy to take another...
Yeah. Final sup now?
Okay. Um, the MBIE advice is still that, um, you're
encouraging people to reach out to the supplier to organize a refund under the
Consumer Guarantees Act, but your advice, um, to
government and to the committee is obviously that the full co-...
wise. Um, when, when will we see enforcement
action, um, especially for those parents like
Paul who have shelled out thousands of dollars?
And, and how can it be the case, um, Andy, that,
um, illegal poison has been sold to children and there is not
enforcement action yet?
So, so I think what, what we've, what we, um,
understand in this case is obviously suppliers
were unaware that, that this type of quartzite sand could contain
these contaminants.
But by a major retailer. It's not like they were ordering it off Temu.
Okay, okay, let them... Yeah, just, just Andy, yeah.
Yeah. So, so, uh, they, they were, as we understand it, unaware that
these products could contain these kinds of contaminants.
So as I understand it, uh, neither WorkSafe nor Customs have taken
enforcement action as yet. Um, it would, you know...
Uh, I'll leave that, um, to them as to, to answer the questions about when and how
they, they might decide to do that within their, within their particular
legislative settings. Um, so
I, I think, again, um,
ultimately, uh, consumers should be approaching their supplier
in the first instance, asking them to take responsibility for, uh,
either, uh, you know, replacing the products, uh,
providing a refund, and taking what other, what other, um,
action that the supplier might be...
you know, the consumer might think that they're responsible for.
For example, cleanup costs. So if the supplier isn't
providing the redress that the consumer thinks is appropriate in that case, then
they can take that to the disputes tribunal.
And so they can look at costs of, uh, I think up to $30,000
at the moment. And then beyond that, um, there are obviously
the, the courts as well that, uh, that this can be, um, prosecuted
through.
Okay. Uh, probably from Gillian this-
I, I just wanted to understand the, the last question I didn't get in was, um,
on a different topic, sorry. But the, back to the AI and, uh, someone
mentioned that there's some work going on with small business, for assistance for
small business-
Yep. ... for their adaptational training. I just wanted to know a bit more about that.
Is it a specific program? What stage is it at? When's it gonna be rolled out?
Yes, it has been. Uh, uh, is a, a specific part of the regional business partner
network. Oh God, Andy, you probably know about it-
Yeah,
that's right. So, so- ... as well as I do. Um, but it has been a trailer under EI?
I-
No, it's-
Th- that's right. So, um, so I look after small business, uh-
(laughs)
... policy as well. So, um, we're right in the process of, uh, of
rolling out a, a trial for, um, our regional business partners to be
able to work with businesses to, uh, provide, uh, co-funding
for particular, um, AI trials within, within businesses
in, um, uh, in regions. So, so that's something that, that we're just
rolling out now. And, and we'll, we'll have a look at how that goes for, for firms
and then, uh, you know, make a call about how, uh, you know, further,
further, um-
Mm-hmm.
... funding in, within the regional business partner program is, uh, is
appropriated down the track.
And, and so the regional business partners, would they identify with the software
or whatever that... Do they choose that or, or how much...
Is it off the shelf or how does that-
Yeah. So, so my understanding is that, um, is the way that it would work was that,
um, there would be... that, yeah, the, the regional business partners themselves
would identify appropriate suppliers in the region of, of this kind of
advice, and then be essentially matching up businesses that, that have a
particular, uh, that have a particular need or have a particular interest,
um, that they're seeking through, um, to develop through AI and
then making that match and then ............................
Okay. And is there any ability or inclination for the procurement process
to identify New Zealand providers that could be utilized with a view
to how we're developing our own internal infrastructure for AI?
Um, I'm not... Look, I'm not, I'm not sure it favors any particular...
I mean, obviously, the, the, the agent in, in New Zealand would
be a, uh... you know, would be an New Zealand agent, but the software and
AI tools that they might apply-
Yeah.
Um, I don't think we've got any particular settings around that.
Obviously, a lot of the, uh, a lot of the AI tools that have been
developing, um, a- around the world are, you know, global
institutions. But obviously there's other options out there.
Yeah.
So that's something that we could think about.
And, and with your... Sorry, final question.
Um, i- is there any way you'd be formulating kind of
useful, um, feedback on what worked, what didn't-
Yes.
... what they liked-
Absolutely.
... yeah, all, all the typical stuff you would usually do, but-
And there's no irony in the fact that we might be using some AI (laughs) to analyze
some of those insights.
But yes, we are taking, um... we are actually using AI to extract what we're
learning from those mentors and the regional business partner network to give us
some insights to use into the next phase.
So yeah, as well as, as helping other businesses use it, we're using it ourselves
to actually further the use of AI.
One, one of the prohibiting factors sometimes with small business owners would be
you're a, um, owner-operator who's already pretty snowed under with-
Yeah.
... meeting day-to-day business requirements.
Um, there seems to me to be an opportunity there with young people
who are more digitally native coming up through.
Is there any view of how regional business partners would be
utilizing, um, an emerging younger workforce to be
partnering up with small business alongside with some training to increase
productivity and opportunities for, for, for, um,
raising wages for, for people coming up through?
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Yeah, it's a good question and I, and I think, um, you know,
that's, that's something that we're thinking about in the, in the context of the
manufacturing portfolio as well, is how we draw more young people into
these kinds of roles which, um, you know, historically manufacturing roles have
been sort of considered to be, you know, um, quite sort of
task-oriented where, whereas actually there is quite a lot of technology coming
through, uh, in a, in a lot of these jobs.
And so, um, within the, um, within the manufacturing
portfolio one of the things that we are doing is funding the, um, advancing
manufacturing Aotearoa to roll out, uh, essentially,
um, uh,
work, work schemes for... to put simple young people into, uh,
essentially, uh, educate while you, while you work scheme.
Okay.
So, we had a good trial of that last year up in Hamilton and, and the AMI are
looking at, um, at rolling that out more widely as well, um, in
the context of, of small business.
Um, I think y- one of the things with AI in, in small businesses-
Oh, so can I ask, what was the Hamilton one called? What was the name of...
Did it have a name? The Hamilton one you just referred to?
Yes, I'm, I'm struggling to remember the name of it.
I'm,
We'll come back to you with the name.
I can come back to you. I can come back to you on that.
Um-Uh, I should know the answer to that, but, um, but yeah, we can
come back to you about that. But in the- in the context of, um, of small business,
I think that there is a lot to be gained, um, by, you know,
the really small businesses. You know, the ones that- that are essentially,
um, you know, full-time, uh, full-time running the
show. Um, you know, things... th- th- there are
off-the-shelf, uh, sort of AI tools that they can pick up relatively
cheaply. So, I think one of the things that we'd like to understand through the
regional business partner trial is who gains most, um,
out of- out of some of the more sophisticated tools that AI can
provide. And those might be some of the sort of, you know, five to
20 FTEs as opposed to-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, as opposed to zero FTEs or- or one FTE.
Those people can probably get quite a lot of, um, you know, quite a lot of
traction just by, you know, getting s- a subscription to one of the,
um, accounting software services or something like that-
Mm-hmm.
... that employ AI in their service already.
Um, so that's one of the things that we're looking at as well.
Um, part of that will also... Um, our research as part of this program into what's
the barriers to adoption for AI.
Mm-hmm. So, we'll get some insight not only in what are the uses and what are the benefits,
but what are the barriers for small business in particular entering into that?
Is it, you know, is it fear of technology? Is it skill?
Is it just time? Yeah.
Is it understanding the breadth of the market?
So, we'll get some insight into that as well.
Okay.
And that will help us tailor-
What's the rough timeframe
for that? All right. No, no, members. We don't have time for any
more questions.
We don't have the time. Sorry. (laughs) Uh, any further questions can be asked later on.
(laughs)
Uh, so we'll have to suspend this until 1:20. Uh, thank you so much.
We'll see you again at 1:20.
Right. Good morning.
Thank you. Thank you very much, Chair.
So, we move into private session. Thank you.
It'll take me a few minutes to make up all my
papers. (laughs) ???
I'm just gonna...
Yeah.
... retrieve them.